SQUARE PEG MEETS ROUND HOLE
The Age of Cryptocurrency
Paul Vigna

With the Mt. Gox collapse and the Silk Road drug bust, a growing group of entrepreneurs and businessmen within the bitcoin community started to be more welcoming of regulation in what had been a lawless domain. 

These newcomers with less investment in bitcoin's philosophical mission saw regulation as the road to bitcoin's salvation. Without it, they believed, the cryptocurrency would continue to be perceived by the general public as a risky fringe product and it would never fulfill its potential as a disruptive technology.

In their 2006 book, The Starfish and the Spider: The Unstoppable Power of Leaderless Organizations, Ori Brafman and Rod Beckstrom developed a metaphor to explain the power of the kind of open-source collaboration and decentralized decision-making that defines bitcoin. 
- If you cut off a spider's legs, it's crippled, and if you but off its head, it dies. 
- If you cut off a starfish's leg, it grows a new one, and the dislodged leg can grow into an entirely new starfish. As for head or brain, it has none. 
Similarly, a decentralized organization has no central point of vulnerability and is thus virtually impossible to shut down or destroy. Some contemporary Internet organizations that thrived under the starfishlike advantages of decentralization are Wikipedia, Craiglist, BitTorrent. 

With bitcoin, so long as no single miner has control of 51% of the hashing power, the mining network that administers the monetary system has a fully distributed power structure. No single entity anywhere has control over the system, which means it has no vulnerable point of attack. There could be (and are) vulnerabilities in the ecosystem that has been built around the network, but the network itself, the group of computers taht collectively decide on what bitcoin is and how it should function, is virtually impossible to shut down. 

The law is designed to deal with centralized institutions in which identifiable managers are deemed responsible for an organization's conduct. It has no way to operate with a starfish network. 

