A NEW NEW ECONOMY
The Age of Cryptocurrency
Paul Vigna

In our current society we're seeing a simultaneous contradictory trend of decentralization versus centralization. 

The concentration of power and contrl that contributed to the financial meltdown of 2008 has only gotten more intense since that crisis. The preferred solution by policymakers to the the economic and financial disaster was to double down on the old systems of concentrated power. 

The big-is-better solution favored the few and held back the many. It's a story of big banks, big companies, and big homes for the 1%, with close to nothing left for the rest. This is one of the features of our 21st century economy, and it's all about centralization. 

Yet at the same time, signs of decentralization are clear, mostly on account of new technologies that gave people the tools and motivations to extract themselves from dependences on those big, centralized insitutions. 

Many industries are experiencing shifts towards decentralized models that bypass middlemen gatekeepers: 
- tourist accommodation without hotels, 
- driver-owned taxi services without central dispatch services, 
- e-marketplaces for neighborly tool rentals that take business away from hardware stores. 
And this is all  happenning even WITHOUT the use of cryptocurrencies or blockchains. 

These new business modeles are extensions of a process that began far earlier with the advent of the Internet. By unleashing this DIY approach to commerce, changes in technology and culture are leading to new methods of interacting, both socially and economically. 

THE NEW NEW GOVERNMENT

The sovereign-money system, and specially the fiat money that gives the state unchecked power to print currency as it sees fit, has arguably been the most powerful weapon in the nation-state's aresenal. More than just generating seigniorage, controlling the nation's money has allowed governments to control the apparatus of power. 

The nation-state has proven adaptable over the past 500 years, so there's no doubt that it could find ways to adapt and survive to cryptocurrencies. One co-option approach might be to start issuing sovereign cryptocurrency itself. 

If all this new technology disrupts jobs as expected, society will inevitably call on government to soften the blow. It's vital for society to figure out the right mix of safety-net provisions and transitional support to soften the blow for the millions who could be out of work. 

This is not a moment for government to be sidelined and made irrelevant by this new technology. For all the utopian dreams of a self-help society that has no need for a centralized authority, it's difficult to imagine how all these conflicts and diverging interests can be negotiated without a central arbiter. 

To throw government out entirely could be inviting new monopolizing forces to take control of the economy of the future, even if its underlying infrastructure is built upon decentralized cryptocurrency techology. 


