GENESIS
The Age of Crytocurrency
Paul Vigna

In October 31 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto released his paper on Bitcoin: a system of online exchange that uses encryption to allow two parties to exchange tokens of value without divulging vulnerable information about themselves or their financial accounts. A form of digital cash intended to operate outside the traditional banking structure.

"Mining" is probably not the best word since the computers what the "mine" Bitcoin is confirm transactions. The "mined" Bitcoin are a reward for being the first miner to solve a randombly generated, mathematically complex puzzle that must be completed before transactions can be confirmed. This reward gets increasingly difficult to attain as miners add more computational power to the network.


ORIGINS

For much of history since its beginning in ancient Egypt, the essence of crytograhy was in encoding language to keep a message secret. But in the digital era, it found a much broader application, evolving into a way to protect personal, corporate and government information.

    Cryptography as a tool to enhance individual privacy and to shift power from big, central institutions to the human beings who live in their orbit.

Nakamoto's project didn't just explode in a void. Like any brilliant invention, it's built on the backs of prior inventors.
Cryptocurrencies can trace their roots through centuries of innovation that enhanced human communication and exchange, from the printing press through the telegraph to the Internet.
But the most direct precursor was the Cypherpunks. The group started in the early 1990s during the cusp of the Internet Age. It was a loose affiliation of cryptography wizards that shared a common concern about the creeping erosion of privacy and individual disempowerment in modern society. One of their first idea was a digital currency.

    "Just as the technology of printing altered and reduced the power of medieva guilds and the social power structure, so too will cryptologic methods fundamentally alter the nature of corporations and of government interference in economic transactions".
    - Tim May. Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto.

Guided by the principle that in the digital age protecting privacy would be crucial for maintaining an open society, the Cypherpunks set out to create tools to allow people to maintain annonymity.

During the early 1990s, the project DigiCash was implemented as an electronic-payment solution that did much more. It protected user privacy; it removed payment-processing intermediarie and the costs that come with them; it even promised to end power structures and corruption.
These ideas were ahead of their time. Society wasn't ready for them. More accurately, the banks and other interest groups that manage the finance system weren't ready for them.
Wall Street banking is a rent-seeking exercise. It would be inclined to preserve and strenghten centralized revenue streams such as credit-card transaction fees rather than remove them.

HOUSE OF CARDS

Satoshi Nakamoto released Bitcoin just one month after the Lehman collapse in 2008. At that moment we came to realize that a complete paralysis of the most important financial system in the world was the price we paid for letting Wall Street deepen its model of centralized, rent-seeking power. 

Western economies began hemorrhaging jobs, stock markets collapsed, world trade came to a halt. The collapse of banks and the massive public bail outs left a bitter taste in the mouths of citizens forced to prop up these banks. This translated into a LOSS OF TRUST IN GENERALLY, both financial and public.

    "The root problem with conventional currency is all the trust that's required to make it work. The central bank must be trusted not to debase the currency, but the history of fiat currencies is full of breaches of that trust. Banks must be trusted to hold our money and transfer it electronicaly, but they lend it out in waves of credit bubbles with barely a fraction in reserve"
    - Satoshi Nakamoto

FUNDAMENTAL TRUST

Trust was the most important element of capital markets:
- Trust that counterparties were good for the money they pledged
- Trust that market prices really did reflect all available information at the time
- Trust that if an asset was represented on the balance sheet as being worth X amount of dollars, it actually was worth X amount of dollars

The collapse of Lehman and AIG shattered all that. Nobody trusted asset valuations, nobody trusted price quotes. Nobody trusted the banks' balance sheets.

The message seemed to be that the centralization of money is destructive and that attempts to change that from within would fail. The solution could only be true decenstralization, by coming up with a brand-new, rebel monetary system.

In the absence of a central authority, how do you get eveyone in the network to cooperate? If you can't create a collective authority, how do you stop people from gaming the system and spending bitcoins they don't have?
Nakamoto came up with a twofold solution.
- BLOCKCHAIN LEDGER. With this design, transactions are arrenged in chronologically arrayed blocks that give miners the ability to verify their contents by comparing them to the historical ledger of account balances. Once satisfied, they acknowledge their approval by moving on to create the next block and chaining it to the now-approved predecessor.
This verification and chaining of blocks, and the acceptance of each new one as the legitimate base on which to build future blocks, constitutes a consensus on the validity of the underlying transactions. 
- MINING REWARD ALGORITHM. This created the exact incentives needed to get the owners of the networked computers to commit the electricity and computing resources needed so that their machines would help maintain the blockchain ledger. 

Nakamoto also had to create a sense of ingrained value in bitcoins. He did this by fiddling with the time schedule for the future release of coins.
- In the first 4 years, the protocol would set a fixed amount of 50 coins to be released every 10 minutes.
- It would reduce the issuance to 25 coins at the end of 2012 and keep halving it again every 4 years until the supply reached zero in 2140, when all 21 million coins would have been released
    
    This preprogrammed, diminishing release of a finite supply  of coins created a sense of scarcity, which built a base of support for bitcoin's price that would inventivize miners to keep working with it. 

Since there is no single point of control, no central server to coordinate the globally spread network of computers, there is no way to shut the alternative system down. 

For Bitcoin to develop, it needed an alternative to mining as a way to adquire coins. You had to be able to buy them with dollars and other fiat currencies. On October 2009 New Liberty Standard came out. They calculated a dollar-exchange rate for Bitcoin based on the cost of electricity for mining. The first quote list for one Bitcoin was 0.08 of a cent.