ROLLER COASTER
The Age of Cryptocurrency
Paul Vigna

If community is one important part of growing a currency, the other part is comparative advantage. It has to be fundamentally more useful than that which it hopes to replace.
The main benefit that bitcoin offers is the capacity to make electronic payments cheaper and more efficient.

Let's say you go to Starbucks and buy a coffee with a credit card. Your personal card information goes through several entities that analyse and clear the payment, making copies of itself in the databases of each entity. Each intermediary company demands a cut for being part of the operation, which is usually around 1 to 3% of every sale. 

Hundreds of thousands of people are employed by banks, payment processors and credit card companies to keep this system running. We need these middlemen because they help create the institutional trust on which our exchanges depend. 
By removing them, and the fees that are charged for the work they do, we would also free up funds for investment in new businesses, new products, and new jobs. 

    The entire architecture of electronic payments is built on the assumption that banks belong in the middle of global money flows. 

The problem is not the debt in itself, it's the complexity of the system for clearing that debt. By handing Starbucks your card, you're not transferring money as creating a series of IOUs between you, your bank, Starbucks' bank, and Starbucks.

SUBTITLE TO BE DETERMINED

The challenge for bitcoin's salesmen is not convincing the merchants of the benefits of bitcoin, but convincing the customers.
Unless they're contemplating all the hidden costs listed above and are looking to build a more efficient, fairer system for everyone, typical customers can't appreciate the cost savings of bitcoin. 
End users are focused on the risks, not on the benefits of bitcoin. 

1. Security
Bitcoin functions like cash: once it's sent, it's sent. There's no way to get it back. If your bitcoins are stolen, you can't retrieve them.
If you keep your bitcoins in a "hot wallet" on a computer that's connected to the internet, a hacker could gain access to your private key and steal them. Also, if you lose your private key or forget it, there's no way of getting back your bitcoins.
If you have significant bitcoin holdings, you can move most of it to a "cold wallet" (and keep the private key on a piece of paper in a safe place) and keep the coins you use day to day on a "hot wallet" in your computer. 

2. Price Volatility
A currency must exhibit price stability if it's to function as a medium of exchange, in addition to proving itself a reliable store of value and an accepted unit of account. 
Bitcoin is a volatile asset that is much better viewed as a commodity than as a currency. 
Volatility is a good thing since it brings profit-seeking traders into the marketplace. Their presence encourages the development of sophisticated exchanges and more reliable mechanisms for changing bitcoin into fiat currencies. 
Traders also provide liquidity to markets. As more traders enter the market, liquidity increases and prices stabilize. It's volatility, not price gains that first draws traders in, since that's what creates profits.
Bitcoiners should be "embracing volatility", since it will help create the payment network infrastructure and monetary base that bitcoin will need in the future.



