COMMUNITY
The Age of Crytocurrency
Paul Vigna

Like other cultures, bitcoin also has its art, its music, even its poetry. It has also cultivated larger-than-life personalities who are recognized as "bitcoin evangelists".

The most important of these quasi-religious ideas lies in the cultural building block that Nakamoto laid with their mysterious appearance in the world of cryprtocurrencies in 2008 and their equally mysterious disappearance from it 3 years later. This gave bitcoin its CREATION MYTH. 

WHO IS SATOSHI NAKAMOTO?

- In the early days of Bitcoin, Satoshi's anonimity meant enforcement agents couldn't find Satoshi and shut down their proyect before it got started. Also, early adpoters might have mistrusted a founder that thought was pumping their own currency.
- A problem that stops Bitcoin from going full mainstream is that most people see the mystery od Satoshi as a reason not to trust Bitcoin.

Even if one person did have the original idea of a decentralized, networked currency, its development ultimately was a group effort. "We are all Satoshi".

BUILDING COMMUNITY

Anybody can download Bitcoin's code for no cost and start running it as a miner. You instantly become a node, one of the thousands responsible for keeping the network running and generating coins. 

    Everybody who's invested time and computing power is, in a real sense, the system. This gives you a stake in its future. It helps build a community of dedicated users. 

-   In 2010, Gavin Andresen bought 10.000 bitcoins for $50 and gave them all away.  The objective was to expand the usage, grow the community and build up the currency. Andresen believed that bitcoin needed people using it and spreading it around if developers were to be encouraged to build useful tools around it.
-   Laszlo Hanyecz discovered that mining could be highly improved by using the graphics cards processors. In May 2010 he also bought a pizza from Papa John's with bitcoin. He also wrote a version of bitcoin that could run on Mac computers. 
    Him buying the pizzas showed the outside world that bitcoin had actual value and attracted a lot of attention. 

The use of graphic cards to mine bitcoin ramped up the difficulty of the mathematical puzzles of the blockchain, which made mining increasingly time-consuming and less rewarding.
Nakamoto wasn't happy about this development. The founder wanted a system that could be accessed by regular people using common equipment. It was becoming impossible to mine without powerful computers. 

- In July 2010, Jeb McCaleb created Mt Gox bitcoin exchange. It was the first major bitcoin exchange and the first really visible business in the bitcoin world. This further validated that this digital currency had many uses beyond the tech community. 
- In June 2011, Mt Gox accounts were hacked, bitcoin went missing from several accounts and sold for pennies. This brought the price of bitcoin from $17 to cents. 
- Shortly after, Silk Road started using bitcoin as a medium of exchange. There you could find any kind of illegal product or service available. Silk Road managed to operate with over a million users until 2013, when the FBI shut it down. With all of its notoriety, Silk Road played a key role in developing bitcoin by expanding its community of users. 
-  A problem for bitcoin users of the time was the long wait to exchange bitcoin and fiat money. BitInstant appeared in August 2011. The service would forward money on credit to speed up the transfer of funds between exchanges, for a fee. Later on BitPay and Coinbase offerred easy interfaces for people to receive bitcoins and convert them to dollars.
- Bitcoin Magazine was founded in 2011 and in May 2012 became the first serious publication dedicated to crypto currencies. 
- In September 2012, the Bitcoin Foundation was founded in Seattle. During this time, the phenomenon of bitcoin "meetups" took off in bars and cafés all over the world. 
- In March 2012 the first major bitcoin thefts were reported, with more than $500.000 stolen from Bitcoinica. Bitcoin's core software remained untouched, but companies were showing vulnerabilities. 
- During all this time, the bitcoin price went up, up and up.

ALTCOINS

Altcoins would use the same or similar aspects of bitcoin's system to create new cryptocurrencies. This was possible because of bitcoin's open-source protocol and its lack of owner. Anybody can download the software, copy it, and build something new from it. 
One example of altcoins is dogecoins. Based on the meme, dogecoin was going to be fun and its members were going to use their currency to do good deeds.
In roughly 4 months, a community of thousands materialized around dogecoin.  

- Some believe that the new altcoins are simply taking market share away from bitcoin, though bitcoin's market capitalization remains on top.
- Other think that by expanding the range of technological innovation and the branding and cultural production associated with cryptocurrency, the alternative communities are helping create a grander, shared purpose.

Many bitcoiners believe that cryptocurrencies could play a role in creating a more humane society. Philantropy helps to physically spread bitcoin around and create a positive image for it, while also expanding the community. 
Cultural production also helps strnghten communities. We find bitcoin literature, bitcoin poetry, bitcoin artwork, bitcoin songs. It's a striking demonstration of how much this idea has captured people's imagination. Nobody writes songs about PayPal.

    More than just a currency and a technology, bitcoin is a countercultural movement. But like all countercultural movements, it will go nowhere as a force of societal change unless it moves beyond that definition and finds its place in the mainstream. 
    Doing so takes more than songwriters and poets singing praises to it. It also needs ordinary people to find something appealing in it and spread that idea around. 

Bitcoin's growth also depends on lower-profile individuals who use the cryptocurrency, that make it function as an element of everyday life.
This is how bitcoin grows, by word of mouth and chance encounters. For a system that is decentralized, that isn't being run by a for-profit enterpresise, where nobody is putting any money into marketing or advertising, it's the only was the commuunity can grow. 




