INTRODUCTION
The Age of Crytocurrency
Paul Vigna

Bitcoins are stored in digital bank accounts or "wallets" that can be set up at home by anyone with Internet access. There is no trip to the bank to set up an account, no need for documentation or proof that you're a man. Indeed, bitcoin does not know your name or gender, so it allows women in patriarchal societies, at least those with access to the Internet, to control their own money.

Bitcoin is a groundbreaking digital technology with the potential to radically change the way we conduct banking and commerce, and to bring billions of people from the emerging markets into a modern, integrated, digitized, globalized economy. If it works (and that's still a big if), an awful lot of things that today seem like part of the natural state of the world are going to look as antiquated as Gutenberg's printing press. 
The system we use now for managing exchanges of currency and assets dates back to the time of the Medici family of the Florentine Renaissance, when banks first assumed dominance in the monetary economy of Europe. They figured out how to intermediate between savers and borrowers, bringing in the excess capital of the former and parceling it out to those among the latter who needed it - all for a fee. 
By bringing society's myriad of debts and claims into the central ledger of a single bank, the bankers created a powerful, new CENTRALIZED SYSTEM OF TRUST. With the help of their specialized intermediating services, strangers that previously had no way of trusting each other enough to do business could now do so. The Medici created a high-powered system of money creation: money being not a physical currency but a system for organizing, expanding, and sharing society's debts and payments.
By creating this centralized system of trust and then putting themselves in the middle of it, banks became extremely powerful, eventually too much so. Since strangers could not do business with each other without the banks, the world's increasingly complex and interconnected economies became utterly dependent on the bankers' intermediation. Thus the banks created the ultimate rent-seeking business, positioning themselves as fee-charging gatekeepers, managers of the financial traffic that made economies tick.

CRYTOCURRENCY 
This technology cuts away the middlemen yet mantains an infraestructure that allows strangers to deal with each other. It does this by taking the all-important role of ledger-keeping away from centralized financial institutions and handing it to a network of autonomous computers, creating a decentralized system of trust that operates outside the control of any one institution. 
Crytocurrencies are built around the principle of a universal, inviolable ledger (blockchain) that is made fully public and is constantly being verified by these high-powered computers, each essentially acting independently of the others. That means we don't need banks and other financial intermediaries to form bonds of trust on our behalf. 
By eliminating middlemen and their fees, crytocurrency promises to reduce the costs of doing business and to mitigate corruption inside those intermediating institutions as well as from the politicians who are drawn into their prosperous orbit. The techonology's potential as a force for transparency and accountability goes far beyond money and payments, as it can strip out information-controlling middlemen from many other forms of human exchange (like elections).
THIS TECHNOLOGY IS A FORM OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION THAT PROMISES TO SHIFT THE CONTROL OF MONEY AND INFORMATION AWAY FROM THE POWERFUL ELITES AND DELIVER IT TO THE PEOPLE TO WHOM IT BELONGS, PUTTING THEM BACK IN CHARGE OF THEIR ASSETS AND TALENTS.

Even as bitcoin aims to decentralize monetary power, capitalism's innate monopolizing tendencies could lead some players to accumulate enough computing power to seize control of the network and revert a trustworthy, decentralized system back to one where self-interested, centralized institutions are in control. Bitcoin is not currently under such a threat, still the threat cannot be fully eliminated.

At its core, crytocurrency is not about the ups and downs of the digital currency market; it's not even about a new unit of exchange to replace the dollar or the euro or the yen. It's about freeing people from the tyranny of centralized trust.

Two meanings of bitcoin:
    - Bitcoin, the currency. The digital units of value that are used by people to exchange for goods, services or other currencies. Whose price tends to swing wildly against traditional government-issued currencies.
    - Bitcoin, the technology. Refers to the system's protocol, the fundamental set of programming instructions that allow computers to communicate with each other. Bitcoin’s protocol is run over a network of computers that belong to the many people around the world that are charged with maintaining its core blockchain ledger and monetary system. It provides those computers with the operating instructions and information they need to keep track of and verify transactions among people operating within the bitcoin economy. The system employs encryption, which lets users key in special passwords to send digital money directly to each other without revealing those passwords to any person or institution. Just as important, it lays out the steps that computers in the network must perform to reach a consensus on the validity of each transaction. Once that consensus has been reached, a payee knows that the payer has sufficient funds—that the payer isn’t sending counterfeit digital money.
    We can think of the technology like an operating system. The difference is that bitcoin's operating system is not providing instructions to a single computer on how to work itself but to a network of computers on how to interact with each other. Its core features are its decentralized model of "trustless" proof and an automatically generated database that contains every transaction ever completed, is made available to everyone in real time, and can never be tampered with.
    Because it comes with a fully verifiable, transparent record of ownership that requires no centralized registry, this “trustless” system allows people to exchange all sorts of digitized items of value and any manner of useful data with confidence that the information is accurate. This all comes without the costly intervention of banks, government agencies, lawyers, and the many other intermediaries required to make our current, centralized system function. That’s the power of bitcoin the technology.

CONTROL OF A CURRENCY IS ONE OF THE MOST POWERFUL TOOLS A GOVERNMENT WIELDS. Bitcoin promises to take at least some of that power away from governments and hand it to people. That alone augurs significant political, cultural, and economic clashes. 




