GETTING STARTED WITH TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Jack D. Schwager

- CHAPTER 5: CHART PATTERNS 
ONE DAY PATTERNS

GAPS 

1. Common gap: usually occurs withing a trading range and isn't particularly significant.
2. Breakaway gap: occurs when prices go beyond a trading range. A breakaway gap that isn't fulled within a few days is one of the most significant and reliable chart signals.
3. Runaway gap: occurs when a trend accelerates and is a characteristic of strong bull or bear markets.
4. Exhaustion gap: occurs after an extended price move and is soon followed by a trend reversal. The difference between and exhaustion gap and a runaway gap is hindsight. 

IMG gettin_started05_gaps1
IMG gettin_started05_gaps2

SPIKES 
 
A spike high is a day whose high is sharply above the high of the preceding and succeeding days. Sometimes spike highs will prove to be major tops. 

The significance of a spike high will be enhanced by:
- A wide difference between the spike high and the highs of the preceding and succeeding days
- A close near the low of the day's range
- An important price advance preceding the spike's formation 

IMG gettin_started05_spikehighandlow

A spike low is a day whose low is sharly below the low of the preceding and suceeding days. Sometimes spike lows will prove to be major bottoms. 

REVERSAL DAYS 

- A reversal high day is a day that sees a new high in an upmove and then reverses to close below the preceding day's close. 
- A reversal low day is a day that sees a new low in a decline and then reverses to close above the preceding day's close. 

A reversal high day is generally interpreted as suggesting a buying climax and a relative high. However, reversal high days are failry common. 
Frequently, an uptrend will witness a number of reversal highs that prove to be false signals and then fail to register a reverseal high near the actual top. Reversal days provide occasional excellent signals, but far more frequent false signals. 

IMG gettin_started05_reversalday

THRUST DAYS

- An upthrust day is a day in which the close is above the previous day's high.
- A downthrust day is a day in which the close is below the previous day's low.

A series of upthrust days (not necessarily consecutive) reflects pronounced strength. Also, a series of downthrust days reflects pronounced market weakness. 

IMG gettin_started05_thrust

WIDE-RANGING DAYS

Wide-ranging day: a daily price bar that is significantly bigger than the days preceding it. It's a day whose volatility significantly exceeds the average volatility of recent trading days. 

IMG gettin_started05_wideranging

- A wide-ranging day with a strong close after an extended decline is often a signal of an upside trend reversal
- A wide-ranging day with a weak close after a major advance in price can often signal a downside trend reversal

    These huge wide-ranging days should be viewed as serious warning flags that a previous major trend has been reversed





