CHAPTER 2: WHAT SORTS OF BULLSHIT JOBS ARE THERE?
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory
David Graeber

1.  FLUNKIES

-   Flunky jobs are those that exist only or primarily to make someone else look or feel important

Throughout recorded history, rich and powerful men and women have tended to surround themselves with servants, clients, and minions of one sort of another. Assigning people minor tasks as an excuse to have them around making you look impressive has a long and honorable history.
TO BE AN ARISTOCRAT MEANT TO HAVE THE POWER TO ORDER OTHERS AROUND.
An analogous logic seems to be at work in corporate environments.

Examples: Doormen, receptionists and front-desk personnel at places that obviously don't need them, 

    Q: Why shell out a full-time salary and benefits for a woman just to sit at the front desk all day doing nothing? 
    A: Because not doing so would be shocking and bizarre. No one would take a company seriously if it had no one at all sitting at the front desk.

Managers off-load more and more of their responsabilities onto the lowest-ranking subordinate to give the impression that they were too busy to do such things themselves. Leading, of course, to their having even less to do than previously. A spiral culminating in the apparently bizarre decision to hire another manager to stare at the wall, just because hiring him would make it look like that was not what everyone else was doing. 
Whose job is really bullshit, the flunky's or the boss'?

THIS IS WHAT THEY REALLY MEAN IN JOB ADS WHEN THEY SAY THAT THEY EXPECT YOU TO MAKE OFFICE PROCEDURES MORE EFFICIENT: THAT YOU CREATE MORE BUREAUCRACY 

The flunkies end up effectively doing the bosses' jobs for them. This was the traditional role of female secretaries (administrative assistants) working for male executives during most of the 20th century. 

    The middle manager staring at the wall all day may or may not have been willling to admit his job was pointless. But those hired just to make someone like him seem important almost invariably know it and resent it.


Every company must have some sort of underling or assistant to all other employees. Otherwise you wouldn't be a corporation but just some kind of hippie collective.
This creates an even more powerful incentive for those on top of the organizational ladder to hire more employees and only then decide what they are going to do, or to resist any efforts to eliminate jobs that are found to be redundant.
FOR WITHOUT FLUNKIES, TO WHOM, EXACTLY, WOULD THEY BE "SUPERIOR"?


2.  GOONS

-   Goons:  people whose jobs have an aggresive element but, crucially, exist only because other people employ them

Example: national armed forces. Countries need armies only because other countries have armies. If no one had an army, armies would not be needed. Same of most lobbyist, PR specialists, telemarketers and corporate lawyers. Like literal goons, all have a largely negative impact on society

Goons have bullshit jobs because so many of those who have these type of work feel their jobs have no social value and ought not to exist. Most times these jobs also involve manipulative and aggressive tactics.

    "I consider a worthwhile jobe to be one that fulfills a preexisting need, or creates a product or service that people hadn't thought of, that somehow enhances and improves their lives. I believe we passed the point where most jobs were these types of jobs a long time ago. Supply has far outpaced demand in most industries, so now it is demand that is manufactured.

    If we're at the point where in order to sell products, you have to first of all trick people into thinking they need them, then I think you'd be hard-pressed to argue that these jobs aren't bullshit."

Another example are call center employees. Most times, the work involves tricking or pressuring people into doing things that aren't really in their best interest. What really irks is 
1.  the agression and
2.  the deception.
There are few things less pleasant than being forced against your better nature to try to convince others to do things that defy their common sense.


3. DUCT TAPERS

-   Duct tapers are employees whose jobs exist only because of a glitch or fault in the organization, who are there to solve a problem that ought not to exist. Underlings whose jobs are to undo the damage done by sloppy or incompetent superiors

It's a term that comes from the software industry. With the growing reliance on free software, paid employment is increasingly reduced to duct taping. 

Another example is cleaning. Cleaning is a necessary function. But cleaning up after someone who makes a completely gratitous and unnecesary mess is always irritating. Having a full-time occupation cleaning up after such a person can only breed resentment.

Many duct-taper jobs are a result of a glitch in the system that no one has bothered to correct - task that could easily be automated but haven't been for any reason

On the social level, duct taping has traditionally been women's work. In a more material sense, duct taping might be considered a classic working-class function.
There will always be a certain gap between blueprints, and plans and their real-world implementation. Therefore, there will always be people charged with making the necessary adjustments. 
What makes such a role bullshit is when the plan obviously is so stupidly designed that it will fail in completely predictable ways, but rather than fix the problem, the organization prefers to hire full-time employees whose entire job is to deal with the damage.
DUCT TAPERS ARE ALMOST ALWAYS AWARE THEY HAVE A BULLSHIT JOB AND ARE USUALLY QUITE ANGRY ABOUT IT.


4.  BOX TICKERS

-   Box tickers are employees who exist only or primarily to allow an organization to be able to claim it's doing something that, in fact, it's not doing. We're all familiar with box ticking as a form of government, but large corporations will behave in the same way

The most miserable thing about box-ticking jobs is that the employee is usually aware that not only does the box-ticking exercise do nothing toward accomplishing its ostentible purpose, it actually undermines it, since it diverts time and resources away from the purpose itself.

These type of works also involves creating presentations. The physical attractiveness of the reports is fundamental.
If the ongoing importance of a manager is measured by how many people they have working under them, the immediate material manifestation of that manager's power and prestige is the visual quality of their presentations and reports. The meetings in which such emblems are displayed might be considered the high rituals of the corporate world.
IT'S VERY EASY TO CHARGE A LARGE AMOUNT OF MONEY TO WRITE BULLSHIT REPORTS.


5.  TASKMASTERS

-   Taskmasters fall into two subcategories:

    1.  Those whose role consist entirely of assigning work to others. This job can be bullshit if the taskmaster believes that there is no need for their intervention, and that the underlings would be perfectly capable of carrying on with their work without them. 
    They're unnecessary superiors rather than unnecessary subordinates
    2.  Those whose primary role is to create bullshit tasks for others to do, to supervise bullshit or even to create entirely new bullshit jobs.

The entire job of middle management is to ensure the lower-level people hit their "productivity numbers", and will therefore start coming up with formal statistical metrics that their underlings can try to falsify.

It's not capitalism per se that produces the bullshit. It's managerialist ideologies put into practice in complex organizations:
    - The creation of a bullshit job often involves creating a whole universe of bullshit narrative that documents the purpose and functions of the position as well as the qualifications required to successfully perform the job, while also adhiering to the buraucratic requirements of HR
    - Once that's done, there has to be a narrative job announcement 
    - To be eligible for hire, the applicant must present a resume incorporating the themes and phrasology of the announcement to be considered

It can also sometimes be clear that a job is bullshit but still be difficult to determine precisely which of the 5 categories it belongs to. Often it may seem to contain elements of several.

Only one class of people that not only denied their jobs were pointless but expressed outright hostility to the very idea that our economy is filled with bullshit jobs: business owners and anyone else IN CHARGE OF HIRING AND FIRING




