CHAPTER 3: WHY DO THOSE IN BULLSHIT JOBS REGULARLY REPORT THEMSELVES UNHAPPY?
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory
David Graeber

"Workplaces are fascist. They're cults designed to eat your life; bosses hoard your minutes jealously like dragons hoard gold."
- Nouri

Why does having a pointless job so regularly causes people to be miserable? One might imagine that those being paid to do nothing would consider themselves fortunate, especially when they are more or less left to themselves.
Many seem perplexed by their own reaction, unable to understand why their situation left them feeling so worthless or depressed.

Everyone is encouraged to assume that human beings will always tend to seek their best advantage: to find themselves a situation where they can get the most benefit for the least amount of time and effort. But our experience tends to contradict this assumption. 
People almost never act and react to situations in quite the way our theories of human nature predict.

It's not just the purposelessness of the jobs, it's also the falseness. A con artist could easily take delight in what they're doing. But being forced to scam someone is altogether different. In such circumstances, it's hard not to feel you're ultimately in the same situation as the person you're scamming: you're both being pressured and manipulated by your employeer, only in your case, with the added indignity that you're also betraying the trust of someone whose side you should be on.

    Nowadays it's considered important that young people should work. However, it's not considered important they should work at anything useful. They're barely expected to work at all, just to show up and pretend to do so. EFFICIENCY IS NOT THE POINT.

First jobs or jobs are meant to teach:
1.  How to operate under other's direct supervision
2.  How to pretend to work even when nothing needs to be done
3.  That one is not paid money to do things, however useful or important, that one actually enjoys
4.  That one IS paid money to do things that are in no way useful or important and that one does not enjoy
5.  That even when one is being paid to carry out tasks one does not enjoy, one also has to pretend to be enjoying it


HUMAN MOTIVATIONS

We assume that someone being paid to do nothing should consider themselves fortunate. 
"Economic Man": the model human being that's behind every prediction made by economics is assumed to be motivated above all by a calculus of costs and benefits

The assumption is that everyone, left to their own devices, will choose the course of action that provides the most of what they want for the least amount of resources and efforts. This simplicity makes economic prediction possible

If one were to admit that humans have complicated motivations, there would be too many factors to consider and it would be impossible to make predictions

PEOPLE HAVE TO BE COMPELLED TO WORK. 
If the poor are given relief so they don't actually starve, it has to be delivered in the most humilliating way possible, because otherwise they would become dependant and have no incentive to find proper jobs. 
The underlying assumption is that if humans are offered the option to be parasites, of course they'll take it. Almost every bit of evidence indicates that this is not the case


THE PLEASURE OF BEING AT THE CAUSE 

German psychologist Karl Groos discovered that infants express extraordinary happiness when they first figure out they can cause predictable effects in the world, regardless of what the effect is or if it could have any benefit to them.
Scientists had been inclined to assume that humans seek power because of an inherent desire for conquest or domination, or for purely practical desire to guarantee access to physical safety, gratification or reproductive success.
But Groos found that children come to understand that they exist, that they are entities separate from the world around them, largely by understanding that "they" are the thing which cause something to happen.

Experiments have also shown that if one first allows a child to discover and experience the delight of being able to cause a certain effect, and then suddenly denies it to them, the results are dramatic:
-   rage, refusal to engage
-   then a kind of catatonic folding in on oneself and withdrawing from the world entirely

Considering this, we can see why being trapped in a job where one is treated as if one were usefully employed, and has to play along with the pretense that one is usefully employed, but at the same time, is keenly aware one is not usefully employed, would have devastating effects.

    It's not just an assault on the person's sense of self-importance but also a direct attack on the very foundationa of the sense that one even is a self.
    A HUMAN BEING UNABLE TO HAVE A MEANINGFUL IMPACT ON THE WORLD CEASES TO EXIST. 

Humans invent games and diversions for the exact same reason the infant takes delight in their ability to move a pencil. Freedom is our ability to make things up for the sake of being able to do so.
Yet, it's precisely the make-believe aspect of the work that most people with bullshit jobs find the most infuriating. 
Working serves a purpose, or is meant to do so. Being forced to pretend to work just for the sake of working is an indignity, since the demand is perceived as the pure excercise of power for its own sake. 

    If make-believe play is the purest expression of human freedom, make-believe work imposed by others is the purest expression of lack of freedom.
    The notion that certain categories of people really ought to be working at all times, even if there's nothing to do, and that work needs to be made up to fill their time, even if there's nothing that really needs doing, refers to people who are not free: PRISIONERS AND SLAVES

IDLENESS AS A SIN 

Most people who have ever existed have assumed that normal human work patterns take the form of periodic intense burst of energy, followed by relaxation, followed by slowly picking up again toward another intense bout. For example, farming.
This is how humans have always tended to go about necessary tasks if no one forces them to act otherwise.
There is no reason to believe that forcing them to act otherwise is likely to cause greater efficiency or productivity. Often it will have the opposite effect.

In most human societies, men tend to try to monopolize the most exciting, dramatic kind of work and relegate the more monotonous and time-consuming tasks to women. The more patriarchal the society, the more power men have over women, the more this tends to be the case.
THE SAME PATTERN TENDS TO REPRODUCE ITSELF WHENEVER ONE GROUP IS CLEARLY IN A POSITION OF POWER OVER ANOTHER 

    The main reason why work could remain so irregular was because it was largely unsupervised. If those on the bottom produced what was required of them, those on the top didn't really feel they should have to be bothered knowing what that entailed.

The message of the modern "If you have time to lean, you have time to clean" is not that you should be working but that YOU SHOULDN'T BE DOING ANYTHING ELSE

One can find occasional warnings by 19th century plantation owners in South America or the Caribbean that it's better to keep slaves busy even at made-up tasks than allow them to idle in the off-season: IF SLAVES WERE LEFT WITH TIME ON THEIR HANDS, THEY WERE LIKELY TO START PLOTTING TO FLEE OR REVOLT

    The modern morality of "You're on my time, I'm not paying you to lounge around" is very different. It's the indignity of a man who feels he's being robbed. 
    A WORKER'S TIME IS NOT THEIR OWN, IT BELONGS TO THE PERSON WHO BOUGHT IT.
    If an employee is not working, they're stealing something for which the employer paid good money (or promised to do so). 
    By this moral logic, it's not that idleness is dangerous. IDLENESS IS THEFT. 

A CHANGE IN TIME

Back in ancient Greek or Roman times, to be a slave, to be forced to surrender one's free will and become mere instruments of another, was considered the most degrading thing that could possibly befall a human being.
How did we get to the situation we see today, where it's considered perfectly natural for free citizens of democratic countries to rent themselves out this way? Or for a boss to become indignant if employees are not working every moment of "their" time?
This involves a CHANGE IN THE COMMON CONCEPTION OF WHAT TIME ACTUALLY IS.

In societies without clocks, time is measured by actions rather than action being measured by time. Events follow a logical order, but they are not controlled by an abstract system. Time is not a grid against which work can be measured, because the work is the measure itself. 

By 14th century, most European towns had created clock towers, usually founded and encouraged by the local merchant guild. These merchants developed the habit of placing human skulls on their desks as memento mori (a reminder that they should make good use of their time because each chime of the clock brought them one hour closer to death).

By the late 1700s, time was simultaneously a fixed grid and a possession. Everyone was encouraged to see time as the medieval merchant did: as a finite property to be carefully budgeted and disposed of, much like money. 
Also, the new technologies allowed any person's fixed time on earth to be chopped up into uniform units that could be bought and sold for money.
THE CAREFUL BUDGETING OF TIME WAS THE ESSENCE OF MORALITY 

Modern work discipline and capitalist techniques of supervision have their origins in merchant ships and slave plantations in the colonies that were later imposed on the working people back home. But the new conception of time was what made it possible, it was a technological and moral change 

Over the course of the 18th and 19th centuries, starting in England, the middle classes came to see the poor as poor largely because they lacked time discipline: they spent their time recklessly, just as they gambled away their money

At the same time, workers of the Industrial Revolution began rebelling against oppressive conditions using the same language of time. The very act of demanding "free time" had the effect of reinforcing the idea that when a worker was "on the clock", their time truly did belong to the person who bought it.

    - If you're on the clock, don not be too efficient. You will not be rewarded, not even acknowledged
    - Instead, you'll be punished with meaningless bussy work
    And being forced to pretend to work is the most absolute indignity: it's pure degradation, a sheer exercise of the boss' power for its own sake

What "proper work ethic" means is OBEDIENCE (a modern variant of Puritanism)
The idea that dutiful sumbission even to meaningless work under another's autority is a form of moral self-discipline that makes you a better person
Even members of the public are encouraged to see themselves as bosses and to feel indignant if public servants (like transit workers) seem to be working in a casual way, let alone just lounging around

    The need to play a game of make-believe that exists only as a form of power imposed on you is inherently demoralizing.
    It's like taking the very worst aspect of most wage-labor jobs and substituting for the occupation that was otherwise supposed to give meaning to your existence. IT IS A DIRECT ASSAULT ON EVERYTHING THAT MAKES US HUMAN








