CHAPTER 7: WHAT ARE THE POLITICAL EFFECTS OF BULLSHIT JOBS, AND IS THERE ANYTHING THAT CAN BE DONE ABOUT THIS SITUATION?
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory
David Graeber

The less the value of work is seen to lie either in what it produces, or the benefits it provides to others, the more work comes to be seen as valuable primarily as a form of self-sacrifice, which means that anything that makes that work more enjoyable (even the gratification of knowing that one's work benefits others) is actually seen to lower its value, and as a result, to justify lower levels of pay. 

We have invented a bizarre sadomasochistic dialectic where we feel that pain in the workplace is the only possible justification for our furtive consumer pleasures, and at the same time, the fact that our jobs eat up more and more of our waking existence means we don't have the luxuty of "a life". This, in turn, means that furtive consumer pleasures are the only ones we have time to afford. It's what we can call "compensatory consumerism".

How viable is this way of living, considering that the majority of the population most likely to be trapped in pointless employment also appear to be most likely to have lives marked by episodes of clinical depression or other forms of mental ilness.

These work arrangements create a political landscape filled with hatred and resentment:
- Those without work resent the employed.
- The employed are encouraged to resent the poor and uneemployed, who are constantly presented as freeloaders.
- Those trapped in bullshit jobs resent workers who do real productive or beneficial labor. 
- Those who do real productive or beneficial labor are underpaid, degraded and unappreciated. So they increasingly resent those who they see as monopolizing the few jobs where one can live well while doing something useful, high-minded or glamorous ("the liberal elite").
All are united in their loathing for the political class, who they see (correctly) as corrupt. But the political class finds these forms of hatred extremely convenient, since they distract attention from themselves. 

MORAL ENVY: the feelings of envy and resentment directed at another person, not because that person is wealthy, gifted or lucky, but because their behavior is seen as upholding a higher moral standard than the envier's own.
Anyone who exemplifies shared values in too exemplary way is seen as a threat. Ostentatiously good behavior is often perceived as a moral challenge. 

The main rule is that anyone pursuing a useful or high-minded line of work, but who also expects comfortable levels of pay and benefits is a legitimate target of resentment. 

This rule doesn't apply to soldiers or anyone else who works directly for the military. For right-wing populist, military personnel are the ultimate good guys. 

For working-class conservatives, their true hatred is directed at "the liberal elite" (Hollywood, journalism, university, lawyers, medical providers). Behind their hatred seems to be:
1. The perception that the members of this elite see ordinary working people as a bunch of knucle-dragging cavemen
2. The perception that these elites constitute and increasingly closed caste, one which the children of the working class would have a much harder chance of getting than children of the actual capitalist

    Conservative voters tend to resent intellectuals more than they resent rich people, because they can imagine a scenario in which they or their children might become rich, but can't possibly imagine one in which they could ever become a member of the cultural elite.
    If you just want to make a lot of money, there might be a way to do it. But if your aim is to pursue any other sort of value (journalism, academia, the art world, publishing, activism, human rights, etc) and you actually want to be paid a living wage for it, then if you don't have a certain degree of family wealth, social networks and cultural capital, there's no way in.

All the objects of resentment mentioned so far can be seen as violations of the principle of inverse relation of compensation and social benefit.


ROBOTIZATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT

The science-fiction fantasies of the early 20th century have become possible. We could easily rearrange matters in such a way that pretty much everyone on earth lived lives of relative ease and comfort. In material terms this would not be very difficult. 

With the continuos improvements in robotics, work as we know it will resemble less and less what we think of as "productive" labor, and more and more resemble "caring" work. After all, caring consists mainly of the sorts of things most of us would least like to see done by a machine.

But let's imagine robots take over the majority of jobs. Without paychecks, how exactly is anyone going to afford all the shiny toys and efficient services the robots will provide?

Oddly enough, what hasn't been sugested so far is that machines could figure out the optimal way to invest resources in order to answer current or potential future demand, the basic functions that capitalist are supposed to perform.

A case could be made that any future robots or replicators should be the common property of humanity as a whole, since they would be the fruit of a collective mechanical intelligence that goes back centuries, in much the same way as a national culture is the creation, and thus belong to, everyone.

    The more automation proceeds, the more it should be obvious that actual value emerges from the caring element of work. The caring value of work would appear to be precisely that element in labor that CANT be quantified. 
    Much of the bullshitization fo real jobs, and the expansion of the bullshit sector more generally, is a direct result of the desire to quantify the unquantifiable.

Since at least the Great Depression, we've been hearing warnings that automation was about to cause mass unemployment. And automation DID lead to mass unemployment. We have simply stopped it by adding dummy jobs that are effectively made up. 

- A combination of political pressure from both right and left,
- a deeply held popular feeling that paid employment alone can make one a full mora person, 
- and a fear on part of the upper classes of what the laboring masses might get up to if they had too much leisure on their hands has ensured that the unemployment figures in wealthy countries should be between 3 and 8%.

Over the course of the last several thousand years there have been thousand of human groups ("societies"), and the overwhelming majority of them organized the tasks needed to keep them alive in a way that everyone had some way to contribute, and no one had to spend the majority of their waking hours performing tasks they would rather not be doing, in the way people do today.

    The reason the current allocation of labor looks the way it does has nothing to do with economics or even human nature. It's ultimately political.


UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME

Policy implies the existence of an elite group (usually government officials) that gets to decide on something that they then arrange to be imposed on everybody else.
We say "What are we going to do about problem X?" as if "we" were society as a whole. But, unless we are part of the 3 to 5% of the population whose views actually affect policy makers, this is all a game of make-believe. We are identifying with out rulers when we're the ones being ruled.

One solution currently being promoted by social movements that would reduce rather than increase the size and intrusiveness of government is Universal Basic Income.

Social services in government are a vast apparatus that exists to maintain the illusion that people are naturally lazy and don't really want to work. Therefore, even if society does have a responsability to ensure they don't literally starve to death, it's necesssary to make the process of providing the means of continued existence as confusing, time-consuming and humilliating as possible.

    Thousand of people are mantained on comfortable salaries in air-conditioned offices simply in order to ensure that poor people continue to feel bad about themselves.

What would Universal Basic Income would look like?

- You start by giving everyone an equal amount of money. This is impportant in itself because money has a certain symbolic power: it's something that's the same for everyone. And when you give everyone, men, women, old, young, high caste, low caste, exactly the same amount, THOSE DIFFERENCES START TO DISSOLVE

- Any UBI payment would have to be enough to live on, all by itself, and it would have to be completely unqualified. Everyone has to get it. Even people who don't need it. It's worth it just to establish the principle that when it comes to what's required to live, everyone deserves it equally, without qualification. This makes it a HUMAN RIGHT, not just charity or duct tape for lack of other forms of Income

WHAT UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME PROPOSES IS TO DETACH LIVELIHOOD FROM WORK. 
It's immediate effect would be to massively reduce the amount of bureaucracy that's just there to make poor people feel bad about themselves. It's an extraordinarily expensive moral game played to prop up a largely useless global work machine.

Even a modest Basic Income program could become a stepping-stone toward the most profound transformation of all: to unlatch work from livelihood entirely. A full Basic Income would eliminate the compulsion to work, by offering fa reasonable standard of living to all, and leaving up to each individual to decide what they wished to do with their time.

Another consequences of Basic Income would be the disappearing of the sadomasochistic dynamic of hierarchical work arrangement we see today. These are based on the idea that there are severe economical consequences for employees that refuse to be abused. Which would not happen with a Basic Income.



