PREFACE
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory
David Graeber

There were plenty of surveys over whether people were happy at work. There were none, as far as I knew, about whether or not they felt their jobs had any good reason to exist.

Millions of people spend their working lives performing tasks they secretly believe do not really need to be performed.

Over the course of the last century, the number of workers employed as domestic servants (in industry, and in the farm sector) has collapsed dramatically. At the same time, "professional, managerial, clerical, sales and service workers" has tripled.

As predicted, productive jobs have been largely automated away. (...) But rather than allowing a massive reduction of working hours to free the world's population to pursue their own projects, pleasures, visions and ideas, we've seen the ballooning (...) of the administrative sector, up to and including the creation of whole new industries (financial services, telemarketing, corporate law, academic and health administration, human resources, public relations).

IT'S AS IF SOMEONE WERE OUT THERE MAKING UP POINTLESS JOBS JUST FOR THE SAKE OF KEEPING US ALL WORKING.

According to economic theory, at least, the last thing a profit-seeking firm is going to do is shell out money to workers they don't really need to employ. STILL IT HAPPENS.
(...) The layoffs and speed-ups invariably fall on that class of people who are actually making, moving, fixing and maintaining things.

THE RULING CLASS HAS FIGURED OUT THAT A HAPPY AND PRODUCTIVE POPULATION WITH FREE TIME ON THEIR HANDS IS A MORTAL DANGER. The feeling that work is a moral value in itself, and that anyone not willing to submit themselves to some kind of intense work discipline for most of their waking hours deserves nothing, is extraordinarily convenient for them.

ONE POSSIBLE VISION OF HELL: a collection of individuals who are spending the bulk of their time working on a task they don't like and are not especially good at.

Q: What does it say about our society that it seems to generate an extremely limited demand for talented poet-musicians but an apparently infinite demand for specialists in corporate law?
A: If 1% of the population controls most of the disposable wealth, WHAT WE CALL "THE MARKET" REFLECTS WHAT THEY THINK IS USEFUL OR IMPORTANT, not anybody else.

There seems to be a general rule that, the more obviously one's work benefits other people, the less one is likely to be paid for it. 
Even more perverse, there seems to be a broad sense that this is the way things should be. This is one of the secret strengths of right-wing populism. 

If someone had designed a work regime perfectly suited to maintaining the power of finance capital, it's hard to see how they could have done a better job:
- Real, productive workers are relentlessly squeezed and exploited. The remainder are divided between 
- A terrorized stratum of the universally reviled unemployed and 
- A larger stratum who are basically paid to do nothing, in positions designed to identify with the perspectives and sensibilities of the ruling class, but at the same time, foster a simmering resentment against anyone whose work has a clear and undeniable social value

If a private company hired a consultant to come up with a business plan, and it resulted in a sharp decline in profits, that consultant would be fired. (...) With free market reforms, this never seemed to happen. The more they failed, the more they were enacted. The only logical conclusion was that the economic imperatives weren't really driving the project.

We have come to believe that men and women who don not work harder than they wish at jobs they do not particularly enjoy are bad people unworthy of love, care, or assistance from their communities. IT IS AS IF WE HAVE COLLECTIVELY ACQUIESCED TO OUR OWN ENSLAVEMENT. As a result, hatred, resentment, and suspicion have become the glue that holds society together. 
