REFUSE TO CHOOSE! 
Barbara Sher

CHAPTER 3: SCANNER PANIC 

Scanners always hear a clock ticking. Every time they see their birthday or New Year coming, they start to panic. If you ask them what's wrong, they usually say "I can't find the 'one thing' I can stick to. I'm terrified that I'll never find it!"

Compared with the dread of not using their potential, a Scanner's other fears fade in significance. 

    A Scanner senses their own talents but are pulled in so many directions they often accomplish very little. As they watch the years pass, the picture of them still sitting on the sidelines when the game is over creates a growing sense of panic.

Time Sickness: your whole sence of time is compacted into the present moment and you actually forget that tomorrow exists. 
This translates into the belief that if you put off doing anything you love, it will be lost forever. And when you love more things than you can possibly don now, Time Sickness creates panic. 

TOP OBSTACLES FOR PANICKED Scanners

1.  You fear critics. You feel watched, so you're trying to be perfect. Whatever you do never seems good enough, so you drop it and try something else, but you feel like you're wasting precious time. 
2.  You've created a "See, it's impossible!" list. 
3.  You've inadvertently made the project too big.
4.  You don't feel entitled to just do whatever you want.
5.  You think you're the problem. You don't have what it takes or you're not really trying. 
6.  You're pulled in too many directions. It's impossible to decide which one to take. 

Now let's get rid of these obstacles one by one: 

1.  Perfectionists need to admit the source of their own conflict. You're not working for your own high standards: you're working for someone's approval. You can waste a perfectly good life trying to meet the standards of someone who thinks you're not good enough because they can't understand who you are. 
2.  You need to cross some things off your "See, its impossible!" list. If your list is really long, check to see if you've added on extra things to prove how hopeless it is and justify your despair. Your impossible list is saying "I'll never get a chance to do what I love, it's hopeless".
3.  You can shrink the size of your project to fit reality by keeping only the parts you love the most. 
4.  Doing what you love isn't a privilege; it's an obligation. By denying yourself the right to do what makes you happy, you may be depriving others a shot at their happiness. 
5.  You'd do everything "right" if you could. "If I could stick with something, all this mess would go away. If I'd just quit hesistating and spring into action, all my problems would be solved". But don't you understand that if you could do those things you would have?
    Each time you judge yourself, you break your heart.
    One way to get rid of all this criticism: go ahead and fail. If you don't get into action, you've failed anyway. And we're all much too afraid of failure. 
6.  

SCANNERS TOOLBOX: THE WALL CALENDAR POSTER

Nothing drives away the Time Sickness that causes panic better than a Calendar. 

The best kind is big enough to show everything you hope to do for the next few years all at once. You can make it yourself right now:
- Find a large sheet or paper (or tape some ordinary-size sheets together) and divide it into 6 large squares, one for each of the next 6 years. 
- Mark the year over each square, starting with this year. 
- Stand in front of the calendar and think of every project you really want to do. Figure out which ones you might be able to do soon and which ones can wait. 
- Assign a different color to each activity and draw a band of that color on the Calendar in the time you hope to do it. 
- Post your calendar somewhere you can see it daily. And that's all you have to do.

