REFUSE TO CHOOSE! 
Barbara Sher

CHAPTER 4: COMMITMENT PHOBIA

The horror of wasting their lives in front of them, and avoiding commitment itself is often the only thing a Scanner will commit to. 

The commitmentphobe's list of mistaken assumptions:
1. You must choose one and only one path in life
2. Everything you love has to be a career. Doing something for pleasure doesn't count.
3. If you're not in love with your job, it will be a living hell. 
4. You have to get it right, because every career choice requires a huge investment of time and money. 
5. Once you make your choice, you serve a life sentence with no chance of parole. 
6. If you're not passionate to the point of obsession, you'll never be content to give up all you other interests. 

NOT ONE THING ON THIS LIST IS TRUE. 

Almost nobody chooses only one path for an entire lifetime either! What a massive burden for anyone to carry, and an imaginary one at that. Even the most successful people can be certain of changing career directions several times in their lives. 

It's not wise to invest in training for a career before you know these things: 
- What kind of work will you actually do?
- Is training really required?

People usually sign up for school before they know these answers. Many people choose school because it's so clear and simple. For a certain number of years, all they have to do is what's required. And the feeling of being in rehearsal seems to lower stress, too. 

The truth is, you can't find a job that's a life sentence anymore, even if you're looking for one. 

    There is no one passion so great that a Scanner can happily limit themselves to it. Do everything that interests you.

    The elusive search for one great passion can blind Scanners to a dozen REAL passions they experience every day. 

What you've been looking for is an all- encompassing passion that lasts forever. Maybe what you're trying out isn't supposed to be right. Maybe learning about new environments is what makes you happy, what's right for you. 

The only true "passion" Scanners have is the passion to use every part of themselves, to exercise their curious brains, to follow anything fascinating until they've found out what they wanted to know. And then to leave it. 

You'll find many passions. You're not expected to make a commitment to follow one career or lifestyle track to the very end of your life. Your genetic mandate is to make many commitments and enjoy each one to your full capacity. One path will never be enough for you.

Scanners must commit to everything that interest them. You possess a valuable eagerness to explore what's new and an ability to be fascinated where too many people see nothing at all. Those are gifts. Don't even think of squandering them.

THE CAREER TRYOUT

The big problem isn't that people don't make career commitments: it's that they make them too soon. 
If you don't know where you'll sit or what you'll actually be doing, it's way too early to consider any commitment, and your fears are absolutely appropiate. 

1. A Scanner can choose many specialities. 
2. A Scanner can use any decent job to support what they love to do, and do it on their own time. 
3. A Scanner can invent their own career. Don't look on a career list, what you want isn't there. 

    You already know what you like; you just don't know how to find it. 

SCANNER DAYBOOK - THE LTTY SYSTEM

Before you choose a job, see if it's compatible with this 4 step system called The LTTY System: Learn, Try, Teach, Leave. 

In your Scanner Daybook, write up a one-page plan for every career or interest you're considering using the LTTL System. 
For example, let's say you're considering a job overseeing operations for a large company.

1. LEARN: For 6 months, I'll learn how to run the central office of a national graphics firm, coming up with new systems only on paper. 
2. TRY: I'll them implement the new systems, perfect them, make sure they run well. That might take 2 more months.
3. TEACH: When everything runs well and the company wants me to stay and run it, I'll explain I can stay only long enough to teach someone else to do the job. What I teach each day will go into the employee's manual I've arranged to write for the company (and naturally I'll be very well paid for these services).
4. LEAVE: When it's all done, I'll have my farewell party with an important severance package which allows me to live for 1 year without working. During my free year, I'll pursue my own interests and look out for the most interesting job opportunities in different fields, at which time I'll repeat the entire process. 

