REFUSE TO CHOOSE! 
Barbara Sher

CHAPTER 5: TOO BUSY TO DO WHAT I LOVE

- Feeling hurried and harried isn't entirely the result of having so much to do. Many people do just as much in a state of calmness. 
- When you're too rushed to think clearly, you lose any sense of what doesn't have to be done and pile on more work than necessary. You even need more downtime when you're constantly in a state of controlled alarm, because you're not nourished by what you're doing: you're drained by it. 

OVERWORKED PEOPLE ARE SCARED. Scared of forgetting to do something, not meeting a deadline, letting someone down, of things spinning out of control. That's why they never think to make their lives easier or more fun: they just add on more responsability. 

Overwhelming feelings of busyness are never what they seem. 

WHEN DID YOU BECOME THIS BUSY PERSON?

For all of us, there was a time before we were given responsabilities. But there was a point when you stepped out of that Eden of having nothing expected of you and into a sudden need to stay ahead of your mistakes.

SCANNER TOOLBOX
Let's start out by trying to locate when it happened for you. Without giving it too much thought, try to remember the last time you were free of that busy feeling, doing things you enjoyed without having to schedule them. How old were you? Describe the feeling of freedom you had. 
Now MEMORIZE THAT FEELING. Because I want you to visit it at least once a day. 

THE BUSY SCANNER'S BAG OF TRICKS

- Make your mental to-do list and then cut it in half. 
- Get more help than you need. 
- Grab your time first. 
- Ignore everything but your favorite parts. Go for the reward that matters to you. Do only the part you love the best. You can probably do that in a matter of minutes. If you don't have any minutes, close your eyes, focus, and fantasize the best part for a full 30 seconds. 
- Learn to sort and dispose of what comes at you, fast. When things come up, mentally categorize them "urgent, later, someday, not possible, get help on in, forget it, yummy".
- Carry a portable dream deck with you everywhere. A small notebook will do, where you can write down any ideas you get anytime. 
- The setup. Just get every single thing you need for any project set up in advance and have it ready to go. Put it all in one place and then forget it until you have time. Take short, frequent visits to whatever you love. Even 2 or 3 minutes, slip in these brief visits as often as possible.

There's a big danger with people who are too busy. You lose your memory of the luxury of doing less than your full capacity. You lose your common sense, tto. You probably do whatever you can to keep the pace of your life always at high speed, like having an ambulance parked at the curb with the motor running (just in case).


CHECKING IN WITH YOUR feelings

The child inside every stressed person needs attention every time you're feeling harried, frazzled or rushed. And if you've tried to cure burnout by taking time off and doing nothing, you know it doesn't work. Boredom doesn't cure emotional exhaustion, especially for Scanners. 

Creativity and learning cure burnout. Involvement in a fascinating project will heal you. 

SCANNER TOOLBOX - THE MICRO NERVOUS BREAKDOWN
Schedule a Micro Nervous Breakdown at least once a day. 

1. Find a restroom where you can shut the door and have some privacy. 
2. Close your eyes, take a few deep breaths, and silently say "I hurt" and "ouch".
3. If you feel the slightest sensation in your eyes or your chest, pretend to yourself that you're crying and sigh a few times. If you can shed some tears, that's even better but not necessary. 
4. If you can't feel anything, pretend you're an 8 year old kid with al the same responsabilities and silently say "Somebody help me. I'm too little to carry all this. I'm going to screw up". That ought to do it. 
5. Give yourself 2 or 3 moments to feel any sorrow that comes to the surface, silently release your feelings, and notice how your tension melts away. 



