THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 5: VALUE-FREE SCIENCE

COMMUNITIES DO NOT EXIST

It shouldn't surprise us that members of the same culture that gave us capitalism as the dominant economic model (based on the insane notion that selfish individuals all attempting to maximally exploit each other will somehow create stable and healthy human communities) would give us variants of the selfish gene theory as the dominant biological model (based on the equally insane notion that selfish individuals all attempting to maximally exploit each other will somehow create stable and healthy natural communities). Both are justifications for what the dominant culture does: steal from everyone else. 

Absent is the reality of how communities survive and thrive. These must be absent, if members of our culture are going to feel good about themselves as they steal from and destroy everyone else, and as they ultimately kill the planet. 

Not only must the reality of how communities survive and thrive must be absent, acknowledgment that communities even exist must be fundamentally absent. As Margaret Thatcher said, "There is no such thing as society. There are individual men and women, and there are families." How different is this, really, than scientists believing that the most important unit of evolution is the individual and not communities. 

    Communities don't exist, except as collections of individuals from whom we must steal. It's capitalism projected onto the natural world. 

One of the problems with science is that it allows exploiters to pretend they're describing reality when they're speculating and projecting. Part of the point of any exploitative philosophy is to make the explotation seem natural or inevitable. 

It's pleasing for those who wish to exploit others to create a Great Chain of Being and to place themselves at its earthly top. It's pleasing for those who wish to "exploit natural resources" to create a philosophy, a worldview, an ideology, and a theology which declares the world consists of "natural resources", not other beings, and to clasify evidence to the contrary as "speculation" or "philosophizing" or "anthropomorphizing".

The creation of these ideologies of domination not only eases or erases the consciences of the perpetrators, but makes resistance to these perpetrators seem futile. 

    Science is a far better means of social control than Christianity. If you question Christianity you're merely consigned to a hell you don't believe in, but if you question science you must be just plain stupid. 

MOTHER TREES

Just as your own body is made up of other living beings, some of whom share your DNA and the vast majority of whom don't, so too the larger living bodies of forests and grasslands and ponds and streams and rivers and oceans are made up of other smaller living beings, whose lives are as precious to them as your is to you. And these smaller beings affect the health of the larger being. 

Mother Trees don't compete for resources; rather, their presence ensures the healthy survival and diversity of younger trees and plants, as they actively transfer vital nutrients and forest wisdom via an overlapping, interconnected, fungi-rich web of shared roots. If a Mother Tree is to die, she will consciously transfer her resources to her interliked community of living trees before she fully collapses, knowingly "passing her wand" to the next generation. 

Researchers have discovered an underground web of fungi connecting the trees and plants of an ecosystem. This symbiotic web enables the purposeful sharing of resources, that consequently helps the whole system of trees and plants to flourish. 

THE SELFISH GENE

Richard Dawkins's The Selfish Gene is an hymn to ruthless competition: it's a projection onto the natural world of the same mindset that gave us neoliberal capitalism. 

- On the book he gives the example of a population that coexists with ticks. The creatures can't groom themselves and if they don't get rid of the ticks, the ticks can kill them. 
- He defines two strategies: Sucker and Cheat. Suckers groom anybody who needs it, indiscriminately. Cheats accept the grooming but the never groom anyone else, not even someone who previously groomed them. 
- If the population is consisting of all Suckers, everyone would be groomed and there'd be no danger. 
- If one Cheat appears, they can count on being groomed without doing anything. In this case, Cheat genes will start to spread through the population. Beacuse of this, the Sucker genes will soon be driven to extinction. 
- Even if the whole population declines toward extinction, there will never be any time when Suckers do better than Cheats. 
- As long as we consider only these 2 strategies, nothing cna stop the extinction of the Suckers and, very probably, the extinction of the whole population too. 
- He later describes a third strategy of Grudgers, who will groom others when they first meet, but won't groom them again without reciprocity. This  strategy wins out in his model, with Suckers being eliminated and Cheats being reduced to a small percentage. 

Despite the fact that Dawkins is arguing for a selfish gene-induced innate sociopathy and lack of communal responsability, it seems that he's actually making 
an elegant and concise argument in favor of cooperation as a primary mover of evolution, and the community as evolution's primary unit. 

If a primary argument for selfishness is that a world filled with givers would collapse when a cheat arrived, and the dominant culture is clearly a cheat who has arrived and is causing the world to collapse, wouldn't that in fact be an argument that prior to the arrival of the cheat the world might have been full of givers?

    Any culture that would kill the planet would use any means necessary, including philosophy, to avoid perceiving the consequences of its actions, and to ignore even the most straightforward logic. 

The fact that members of this culture have through cheating gained a competitive advantage over other humans and nonhuman beings in no way implies any form of greater intelligence or any other form of superiority. Cheating gains a competitive advantage at the cost of future extinction of those from whom the cheater is taking, and then also the cheater themselves. 

Primary purposees of "knowledge" or "exploration" or "research" (as well as philosophy, religion, ideology, law, and so on) in a supremacist society include increasing the supremacists' beliefs in their own superiority; and even more so, increasing their control over all those they perceive as inferior; which also once again increases their beliefs in their own superiority. 

One of this culture's ways of dealing with liberating ideas that are gaining enough recognition that they can no longer be ignored or ridiculed or crushed out of awareness, is to vigorously co-opt the ideas back into the service of existing bigotries and hierarchies. 

SCIENCE AS VALUE FREE

One of the myths of modern culture is that science is value free, which is not true. 

- Not only because reality is necessarily more complex than any analysis or interpretation of reality, which means that by definition, values must be imposed through what is and what's not included in the analysis or interpretation
- Not only because the universe is far more complex than any human brain or computer, and is far more complex than we are capable of thinking 
- Science is supposed to be "disintered", we always hear. If it's not "disinterested" then it's not science. 
- However, the practice of science in the 21st century is becoming shaped less by national priorities or by peer-review groups and more by the particular preferences of individuals with huge amounts of money

    Industry, industrialist and the military-industrial complex have driven science from the beginning. It's only because we want to forget all this that we pretend science is disinterested in the first place. 

Research that in some way or another attempts to extend human control over the universe is considered value free. Attempts by humans to control the universe are in our very definition of how we know something is true. 

But extending human control over the universe is a value. And it's a value that materially benefits (in the short term, so long as you don't mind a murdered planet) the humans doing the research, and those funding the research, and those publishing the research, and those using the technologies that emerge from the research. They're not and can never be "disinterested". 

    Of course attempting to extend human domination over as much of the universe as possible is seen as either value neutral or positive, no matter how much this attempted domination harms the real, physical world. 

Industrial humans are the only ones who exist. Human functionality is real. Functionality in the real, physical world is not real functionality. A river serves no purpose till it's harnessed for electricity, transportation, and irrigation. 


