THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 7: NARCISSISM

How you perceive the world affects how you behave in the world. If you perceive only human constructs as having meaning or function, then you will overvalue human constructs. And if you perceive nonhumans and their creations as not having meaning or function, then you will undervalue nonhumans and their creations. 

The same is obviously true for those who perceive the creations of males or whites as being more important than those of women or people of color. 

    It's crucial for those who are destroying the planet to insist that nonhumans have no inherent and true functionality, because if species do not serve true functions, the larger communities they are part of won't suffer when humans erradicate them. 

For human supremacists, life on earth doesn't matter to them except as it affects their ability to maintain this way of life. In the narcissitic worldview of the supremacists, the only benefits that really count are those acrued by the supremacists themselves. 

First among those whom the abuser must convince of the rightness of his abuse and exploitation is the abuser. How can he sustain his abusive behavior over the long term if he does not believe his power is deserved and righteous and necessary and used for the common good? How can he fell all of these things if he does not perceive himself as superior to those he exploits? And how better to make himself feel superior to someone than to percive this other as (and better, make this other) dependent upon him?

And how better to convince himself that those he exploits are dependent upon him than by convicing himself that he is the bearer of true meaning and true function; that the lives, actions, and achievements of those he exploits have no inherent meaning or function?

    Not only does how you perceive the world affect how you behave in the world, how you behave in the world further affects how you perceive the world.

    Enslaving, torturing, and killing the world not only proceeds from but also helps create a religion, a science, a philosophy, an epistemology, a literature, in short, a culture, that declares humans to be superior to all other humans and human function to be real function and human meaning to be real meaning. 



