THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 8: REGRET

Researchers at the University of Minnesota noticed that rats experience regret when they make a wrong decision. The experiment was based on them having to wait for a certain food, not knowing if the next food stop was going to have food they liked better with a shorter wait time. 

The definition used for regret is "the recognition that you made a mistake and if you had done something differently, things would have gone better."

    Among the many horrible experiments that scientist have done to rats, one of them is making them addicted to alcohol or drugs. Whatever validity these studies may have extends only to imprisioneed rats, because wild and free rats aren't interested in becoming addicted, as they presumably have better things to do. And what does THIS say about our way of life?

How you perceive the world affects how and what you feel. If affects whether and what you regret. So of course if your way of life is based on privatizing benefits and externalizing costs, and if you're raised to believe that it's not only acceptable but desirable and indeed natural and inevitable to exploit others, or that others were put here or are just here for you to exploit, you're probably not going to feel a lot of regret as atrocities are committed in your name against them. 

Regret the extirpation of a species? Not on your life. Regret our not being able to exploit them further? Now we're talking.

    What supremacists regret is almost never the decisions they make that lead them to exploit and commit atrocities against others, nor the effects of their atrocities on everyone but themselves, but rather they regret only ways that prior exploitation has decreased their current capacity to exploit. 

So, based on the clearly articulated and lived values of human supremacists, there's no reason for human supremacists to regret anything that has happened so far, becasue there's no reason to presume that they believe they've made any major mistakes, or that they should have done anything differently, or that they think that things could have gone better. After all, they have their computers and iPhones. Never mind that the oceans are being murdered. Who gives a shit, right?

And human supremacists call themselves intelligent?

