THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 6: WONDER

Bacteria essentially made life on this planet. If bacteria can create life on this planet, and humans are doing their damnedest to detroy it, then who is stronger: the creator or destroyer?

This question is in many ways key to understanding this culture's self described superiority, its destructiveness, and its perception of its own destructiveness as a sign of its superiority. 

You (the world) deposit wealth (trees, fish, minerals, soil and so on) in a bank (the world) and everyone in the world lives off the interest. In fact each year there is more wealth than the year before. This is because every tree, every fish, every living being deposits more wealth than it takes. How else do you think the world became so wealthy? By everyone making the world rich by living and dying. Everybody wins!

Except I don't like the arrangement. I want it all. So you deposit wealth and I find ever-more-sophisticated ways to steal from you and from everyone else. This means I'm a genius! I'm superior. It's settled. 

NON-HUMAN INMORTALS

- Bacteria reproduce by dividing. Each daughter is part of her mother except that whatever molecules inside her that had become damaged are diluted in her offspring, the dilution acting as a form of self-rejuvenation. Because they reproduce by division, with bacteria there's an unbroken line of self-ness in each one going as far as, well, the beginning.
- Water bears (tardigrades) are half-millimiter creatures taht are everywhere. Top of the highest mountains, in hotsprings, in ocean sediments, in stone walls. Their normal life span is about a year. Their inmortality is more them being extremely tough. When the conditions are tough, the tardigrades reduce their water content of their bodies between 1 and 3% and hibernate. In this state they're virtually indestructible. Including hibernation, they can live between 60 to 200 years.
- Bdelloids are creatures with asexual reproduction that, to avoid the problem off their damaged genetic material passing to their children, they steal DNA from other creatures. For about 80 million years, bdelloids have been all female and reproduced without males. It's believed that sexual reproduction introduces genetic variation and so allows a species to adapt to a changing environment and to genetic degradation. It's also commonly thought that animals that forgo sex eventually go extinct, but the bdelloid proves to be an exception to the rule. 
- Planarians are tiny, non-parasitic flatworms. If you cut off a flatworm's ehad, the body will grow a new head and the head will grow a new body. No matter how many pieces you cut it into, all pieces will generate into new flatworms. 
- Once immortal jellyfish (Turritopsis dohrnii) have reached sexual maturity, they can, when old, sick or damaged, revert to the jellyfish equivalent of infancy. They turn their whole body into a bloblike cyst, and from there they grow a complete new body. 

MORTALITY

All humans will eventually die. The knowledge that we all die is one of the primary causes of all monotheistic religions. Religions that have the gates to their respective heavens open to their followers which, if they followed the rules of the religion while on earth, will receive the blessing of inmmortality normally reserved for planarians, lobsters, bacteria and others. 

A fear of death and a yearning for immortality is also a primary motivator of much human supremacist science. Not only in its desire to assume the omnipotence, omniscience, and immortality of the Abrahmic God, but also in its attempts to mine all of the immortal nonhumans mentioned before to see how we can steal their immortality for our own. 

Lobsters, planarians, bacteria and many others don't have to worry about all of this. They don't HAVE to die. 

As if this weren't enough of a blow to the human supremacist ego, another massive blow can occur when we recall that bacteria outnumber human cells 10 to 1 in "our" body, and quite many of them will outlive us. 

Scientists love to go on about how evolution is based on traits that facilitate survival, and how traits that don't facilitate survival are selected out by causing the bearers of those traist to go extinct. A supremacist mindset is maladaptive, it doesn't facilitate survival. A perception that natural selection is based on ruthless competition is maladaptive. Both lead to behavior that destroys the landbases on whom those who hold these mindsets depend. And if you destroy your landbase, ultimately you destroy yourself. 

    While human supremacists are busy destroying life and asking why any being would "waste energy" helping "competitors", bacteria are busy helping each other gain resistance to antibiotics, helping each other survive. 

INTELLIGENCE BEYOND HUMANITY

If your diagnosis is wrong, it doesn't matter how carefully you follow the prescription. Any solutions to environmental problems that emerge from a human supremacist mindset will, not surprinsingly, serve human supremacism and not (except by sheerest accident) the real, physical world. 

In this culture, only human-created function counts as true function, which means that only consciously-created function counts as true function. Since our boudes aren't considered "human", but only animal matter, our minds are what's important. 

Why is it that when humans consciously conduct heart surgery, we perceive it as miraculous and a sign of our superiority as a species, but when our bodies do it without our minds' conscious intervention, we don't see this as a sign of superior intellect on the parts of our bodies?
And why did I just identify with my mind and not my body?
It all comes back to that belief that only human functionality is true functionality. And in this and many other cases, "human" doesn't include even our own bodies. 

    We forget that the natual world is full of intelligence, and knows far better than we do what it's doing. 
