THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 9: THE SEAMLESSNESS OF SUPREMACISM

TOOL USE

It's tautological to say that humans are superior because we're the only creatures who use tools. The common definition of tool is "a device or implement, especially one held in the hand, used to carry out a particular function." Humans, who have opposable thumbs, decide that a characteristic that defines them as superior is the use of tools, many of which require opposable thumbs.

Using a broader definition of tool as "an item or implement used for a specific purpose," humans aren't the only beings who use tools. When we learn of nonhumans who use, we nearly always change the discourse terms to make certain that we remain number one.

Viruses, bacteria, amoebae and so on basically use our bodies as a sprinkler to broadcast their babies. An example, diarrhea. Bacteria con collectively decide it's time to make you poop, and to do so explosively. That way you spread your feces (and hte little darlings who caused it), all around so they can find new homes. 

    It's nonsense to say that humans are the only creatures who use tools, especially when humans are routinely used as incubators, sprinklers, food and so on by nonhumans.

However, there's a sense in which it's easy for modern humans to accept that we're used as tools. Most people accept that the capitalist system uses them as tools. 

This can be related to what Mancuso said about so many people having trouble accepting that plants are intelligent, but the same people are perfectly willing to accept "artificial intelligence," because computers are our creations, and so reflect our own intelligence back at us. And like computers, capitalism is a human creation.

PROBLEM SOLVING

Another criteria that's used to determine intelligence is the ability to solve problems.

Humans define their intelligence and superiority in part by their ability to solve problems, or rather, some problems of a certain sort and solved only in certain ways. It's all based on very specific and limited definitions of problems and solutions.

So many of the "solutions" to what members of this culture perceive as problems quite often lead to other problems, many of which probably could have been predicted were the people looking at these original "problems" both a) intelligent; and b) not evil.

The only way I can see that someone putting in a dam could not predict that this would wipe out fish species, destroy the submerged lands, dispossess humans and nonhumnas inhabitants, and so on, would be if those suggesting these "solutions" (dams) to "problems" (wainting electricity) were either a) unforgivably stupid; or b) unforgivably evil. Take your pick.

If you can't generate electricity without causing significant harm to those humans and nonhumans who will not be receiving the benefits of this electricity, then you really are only "solving" the "problem" by passing down its harmful effects onto others. In this case, you shouldn't be calling yourself superior or intelligent, but instead a thief of these others' lives. Theft and murder do not by themselves qualify you as intelligent or superior.

The notion that only humans solve problems is ridiculous anyway. Don't you think human use of antibiotics created a problem for bacteria? And what has been the response of bacteria to this problem? Don't you think that bacteria creating resistance to these antibiotics and communicating this resistance to other members of their community is a solution to this problem? And what about the development of antibiotics in the first place by fungi? Wasn't that a solution to a problem?

