THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 3: MOVING THE GOALPOSTS

FISH USING TOOLS

Tool use was once thought to be exclusive to humans. However, lots of animal species use tools. Elephants pick up branches with their trunks to swat flies and scratch themselves. 

An article in Wired magazine reported a fish using a rock as a tool to open a clam and eat it. Some of the comments accepted it as tool use. Other comments are great examples of the moving target for what human supremacists believe constitutes intelligence:

- "Regardless of how smart the fish is, you can't ignore the important fact that it still doesn't have hands. This is about the highest possible level of fish tool use I an imagine a fish ever achieving, short of coercing another marine life to do something for it".
Here we see the association between tool use and intelligence with domination, or the ability to coerce another. 
- "Tool usage isn't a true sign of intelligence. Tool creation is. The ability to perceive of a future use for something and then creating a tool to match your needs is a sign of forethought, deep pondering and the mechanics of the universe, meaning u understand who u are, what u can do, where u are and where u might end up in the future, and in addition an ability to think abstractedly. Best human example is the 'Rambo' style survival knife, multi functions built into the handle, ferocious-looking blade and oversize too, but also created in the last leg of the red danger-time and showing as much people's fear of external danger from other intelligent people as practicality".
- "That doesn't seem much like a fish using a tool. It seems more like the fish was hungry and just busted open the clam. I don't think that a fish could be dumb enough to eat your bait and get hooked yet is smart enough to use a tool".

    I sometimes wonder something similar about members of this culture. I don't think a human could be stupid enough to swallow and get hooked on the belief that you can destroy a planet and live on it, yet be smart enough to use a tool. 

One reason fish strike at hooks is that they, like all of us, make decisions based on cost/benefit and risk/reward analyses. We all make these sorts of decisions, so it's not a sign of stupidity on the part of the fish when the decision ends up killing them. 

CATERPILLARS FIGHT DISEASE

Another example, caterpillars self-medicate. Lots of species of flies and waps lay eggs inside the caterpillars. The egs hatch, then feed on the caterpillar's internal organs before bursting it open like that scene from Alien. 

Caterpillars do something about this: they eat leaves from senecio plants and flood their bodies with alkaloids, that help combat the parasites. Infected caterpillars eat more alkaloid-containing leaves than healthy caterpillars. 

I thought we knew that more or less all creatures make decisions about what to eat based on the needs of their bodies. But fear not: journalists and scientists want to make sure we know that even though caterpillars are making choices, they certainly couldn't be thinking. 

Too many people seem to believe that being able to track the biochemical or bioelectrical processes by which some decision is made or action taken implies there's no volition in these choices or actions. 

Taste exists for a reason. Food not tasting good is one of the ways we know we're full and don't need to eat more. Also, many substances that aren't good for us taste bad. 

COMPLEXITY

    Why is it difficult for us to accept that others besides ourselves have rich interior lives? 
    I guess because that would mean our moral universe just got a whole lot more complex, specially more morally complex.

It's much more convenient to live in a world where your morality is based on a clearly defined hierarchy, with you at the top. To interact with a machine is less complex and less morally complex than to interact with a community. 

What a wonderful experience it is to find yourself in a world of infinite complexity, and infinite moral complexity. It's as though before, you could only move in 1 or 2 dimensions, and now suddenly you're living and moving in 3 dimensions, then 4, then 5, and on and on, and you then wonder how you never went mad from the claustrophobia of earlier having restricted yourself to only 1 or 2 dimensions. 

    To not be able to conceptualize or accept the existence of any form of intelligence that doesn't resemble your own doesn't seem to me very intelligent. 

    And to not be able to conceptualize or accept the existence of any form of suffering that doesn't resemble your own doesn't seem to me very compassionate or empathetic. 

Western science exaggerates the role of the brain in consciousness. Whole books have been written on the consciousness of the atom. Consciousness might exist on an entirely different level. 

When we see something, how do we know if it's real, or if we're seeing it only because we wish so much to believe? The same is true, of course, for not seeing events. 

    If your experience of the world is different than what this culture inculcates you into believing should be your experience of the world, what do you do?

    Many people respond by denying their own experience. And that's the point of a supremacist philosophy. 

It's not great for the ego if you base your self-worth on having nothing in common (not even the rudiments of your nervous system) with other residents of this planet. 

