THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 4: COMPLEXITY AND ITS OPPOSITE

"I believe nature is intelligent. The fact that we lack the language skills to communicate with nature doesn not impugn the concept that nature is intelligent. It speaks to our inadequacy for communication".
- Paul Stamets

In the late 1970s and early 1980s a few scientist discovered what tress have known for a very long time: that plants communicate. 

- Willow leaves were being eaten by insects. The willows altered the composition of their leaves to stunt the growth of the predators. The insects that ate those leaves grew more slowly than normal
- Researchers also found that nearby plants were changing their leaf composition like the infested willows did 
- The study also found that almost every green plant releases its own cocktail of volatile chemicals, and many species register and respond to them. Ants, microbes, moths, hummingbirds and tortoise all detect and react to these chemicals.These type of chemical communication can be called "an universal language" 

The response of the scientific community to this research was calling it bullshit, basically. Plants don't have nervous systems, and therefore they must not be able to do those things that in animals require nerves (never mind the evidence that this was actually happenning). 

NONSENSE

When a supremacism of any sort is one of the unquestioned beliefs acting as a real authority of that culture, defenders of that supremacism nearly always perceive any questioning of any part of that supremacism as a "foolish distraction". They generally perceive and portray themselves as defenders of reasonableness and sanity, and perceive those questioning their supremacism as having come from the "nuthouse".

    Because their supremacist perspective is unquestioned, all questioning of that supremacism by definition will be classed as speculation, and all speculation on that subject will be discouraged. 

    However, speculating about ways to escalate the ability of one's superior class to exploit all inferior classes is seen as innovation, creativity, and a sign of one's intelligence and superiority. 

TELEOLOGY AND INTELLIGENT DESIGN

- Teleology would say that a person has eyes because they have a need for eyesight.
- Naturalism would say that a person has sight because they have eyes. Function follows form (eyesight follows having eyes). 

Some definitions suggest that a teleological perspective implies the existence of God (creative force), or some sort of design to nature. Most definitions contrast human actions, which may under this rubric have purpose, from nonhuman actions, which under this rubric may not. 

For example, "Within material reality only human artifacts possess intelligent form and functionality, purpose. Biological functionality is not truly functionality, but merely resembles the functionality of human engineering".

Really? That's a lot of narcissistic assumptions and self-glorifying tautologies packed into less than 40 words.

Any discussions of intelligent designers are just as irrelevant to the question of whether plants communicate as they are to whether humans communicate.  

PURPOSE FOR HUMANS ONLY

It is taken as a given by much of the scientific community (and much of our human supremcist culture) that nonhumans can't communicate, can't think, don't appreciate life, and so on. But this is merely a given, and is not in any non-tautological way shown. 

    It shouldn't surprise us that scientist have argued so strongly against nonhuman sentience: the last thing any slavemaster wants is to consider the possibility that their slaves have lives of their own, and do not wisht to be bent to their will.

This assumption of human supremacy is killing the planet. 

Enlightenment and its applied twin the Industrial Revolution have combined to become a possibly fatal disaster for life on earth. 

- Enlightenment has destroyed our perception of the world as full of life and meaning and purpose 
- The Industrial Revolution has used the tools of Enlightenment to accomplish this destruction in the real, physical world. The former provides the philosophical foundation and methods of the latter

Let's go back to the idea that "only human artifacts possess intelligent form and intelligent functionality or purpose. Biological functionality is not truly functionality, but merely resembles the functionality of human engineering".

- You may come to believe that as the only one who is able to create true functionality, you can destroy (as modern humans are doing) the "biological functionality" of the oceans to metabolize carbon dioxide into oxygen and a) survive, and b) replace this functionality by one of your creation, which would, of course, be the only true functionality
- You may come to believe that forest can't manage themselves, but you can manage forests
- You may come to believe that after you destroy glaciers, you can create your own and replace their evidently untrue functionality with a true functionality of your own
- You may come to believe that the world can't survive without your interference, while the truth is that the world can't survive your arrogant interference

Human supremacists posit humans as the smartest beings around. Members of this culture contrast themselves positively against members of other cultures, that are clasified as more "primitive", less sophisticated and less intelligent than they are. And scientists are portrayed as the smartest of the smart, the most discerning of the discerning, the sapiens of the sapiens.

    It's pretty fucking stupid to assume that you're the only one who can think, and it's even more stupid to forget your assumption is nothing more than an assumption. 

    It's even stupider still to continue thinking you're smarter than anyone else as your culture destroys life on this planet, fueled in great measure by your perception of yourself as the most (or only) intelligent and meaningful being in the universe. 

ANTHROMORPHIZING

When it came to research on plant sentience, one of the main objections from the science community was that the researchers were anthropomorphizing the plants. The word means "to ascribe human characteristics to an animal, inanimate object, force of nature, etc". 

This presumes a human ownership of intelligence, the ability to communicate, the ability to suffer, the ability to feel emotions, and so on. Any perception of these among nonhumans is to be eradicated. Never mind that these are all natural attributes. 

The Enlightenment and the Scientific Revolution are based on seeing the world as a giant machine, and nonhumans as "beast machines", as Descartes put it. Modern scientific discourse is based on machine language. But machines are a uniquely human-made project. 

You can't get more anthropomorphic than to describe the world in mechanistic terms, to project a human construct onto the real, living world. 

    Isn't it just a tad anthropomorphic to requiere that everyone else's intelligence, response to pain, sorrow, joy, and so on, resemble one's own?

    Or maybe it's just narcissistic. 




