THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

CHAPTER 2: LANGUAGE

Humans are unique in their capacity to have language. 

Except not really. Prairie dogs have language and grammar. Whales have language. Cows, sheep and goats have dialects. Perhaps all species speak. How would we know? We're all too busy trying to rationalize how their languages are not really languages.

PLANT SENTIENCE

Why should we believe that scientist have a better understanding of whether or not plants are sentient than do Indigenous people who have formed millennia-long fully mutual relationships with these plants communities? Or a better understanding than anyone who forms long-term personal relationships with any plant species?

There's the absurd, racist and counterexperimental notion that, once again following the Great Chain of Being, scientist have a monopoly on understanding reality.

Plants are sophisticated in behavior as animals but their potential has been masked because it operates on time scales many orders of magnitude less than that operating in animals. 

- Plants are highly sensitive organisms that actively and competitively forage for limited resources, above and below ground
- Plants are capable of recognition of self and non-self and are territorial in behavior
- Plants interact with the environment and with other communicative systems (other plants, fungi, bacteria, virus, insects and predatory animals)
- Plants based their decisions on where to grow branches (which is a long term proyect that can take years) on its prediction of how sunlight will come through by the time the branch is able to grow to that spot

    It's concluded that plants exhibit the simple forms of behaviour that neuroscientist describe as basic intelligence. 

We know that plants aren't intelligent because they don't have brains. Because we think humans think with our brains, we humans have decided that brains and central nervous system are the only wat that anyone can think and are therefore necessary for cognition. Therefore plants, not having brains and central nervous system, can't think. It's been proven. Thank goodness our supremacy withstood that one!

    The fundamental assumption of supremacists is that until proven otherwise (and in fact, much longer) supremacists presume the other is not a subjective being. 
    
    It's what men and whites and the civilized have been doing since the beginnings of their respectives supremacies. It's what supremacists do. 

Why don't we flip that on its head? Why don't we assume that, until proven otherwise, others are subjective beings?

Answer: the only thing that matters is that we're number one. It makes it so much easier to rationalize exploiting everyone. 