THE MYTH OF HUMAN SUPREMACY
Derrick Jensen

INTRODUCTION: HUMAN SUPREMACISM

We have been taught, in ways large and small, religious and secular, that life is based on hierarchies, and that those higher on these hierarchies dominate those lower, either by right or by might. We have been taught that there are myriad literal and metaphorical food chains where the one a the top is the king of the jungle. 

But what if the point is not to rule, but to participate?

Human supremacism: the belief that humans are separate from and superior to everyone else on the planet. 

Unquestioned beliefs are the real authorities of any culture. A central unquestioned belief of this culture is that humans are superior to and separate to everyone else. Human supremacism is part of the foundation of much of this culture's religion, science, economics, philosophy, art, epistemology, and so on. 

Human supremacism is killing the planet. 

In our culture, the maintance of this self-perception and entitlement are more important than then continuation of life on the planet. 

"Science make it very hard to love the world. Most scientist want the world to fit nice, clear, linear equations, and anything that doesn't fit is ignored, unless you can get a publication out of it. Love isn't a concept that would even come to mind concerning the natural world. The natural world is just a means to an end. A thing to be dissected, so they can get tenure". 

Gosh, the real tragedy of the murder of the planet is that if the planet is dead, it will no longer be able to support our way of life. 

These scientist do understand that it is this way of life that is killing the planet, right? Is it possible to be more stupid than to destroy the planet we live on?

Oh, that's right, unquestioned beliefs are the real authorities of any culture. And if some of the beliefs we must not question include the notions that human communities who do not share our unquestioned beliefs and values are not real communities; and that nonhuman communities are not real communities; and that theft from these (not real) communities is not theft; and that murder of these (not real) communities is not murder or genocide; and that our (not real) theft and (not real) murder of these other (not real) communities can continue forever; that the point of existence is to commit these (not real) thefts and murders; that these thefts and murders will not severely impinge upon our ability to steal from and murder these others; that one of the most unquestioned beliefs in our culture must be that we must never question our inability or unwillingness to question these beliefs; and that the real pity of a murdered planet is that we can no longer continue to steal from or murder it, then I guess we can understand how someone can do something so absurd. 

