Unquestioned beliefs are the real authorities of any culture. A central unquestioned belief of this culture is that humans are superior to and separate to everyone else. Human supremacism is part of the foundation of much of this culture's religion, science, economics, philosophy, art, epistemology, and so on.

Human supremacism is killing the planet.

In our culture, the maintance of this self-perception and entitlement are more important than the continuation of life on the planet.


GREAT CHAIN OF BEING

- It's a hierarchy of perfection, with God at the top, then angels, then kings, then priests, then men, then women, then mammals, then birds, and so on, through plants, rocks and sand
- It's a profoundly body-hating notion since those at the top (the perfect) are pure spirit, and those at the bottom (the imperfect, the corrupt) are pure matter, pure body
- Humans are the center of attention, with those above humans being bodiless and perfected, and those below being fully embodied, imperfect and having no mind
- And of course, those at the top get to use those below as they want. For example, men have access to the bodies of women, because men are higher on the hierarchy than women
- The Great Chain of Being also underlies the modern belief that the world consists of resources to be exploited by humans. Traditional Indigenous people across the earth don't believe in this hierarchy: they believe the world consists of other beings with whom we should enter into respectful relationship, not inferior others to be exploited. 

Our perception of evolution is infected with this belief in the Great Chain of Being, as often people (including scientists) think, write and act as though all of evolution was about creating more and more perfect creatures, leading eventually to that most perfect creature yet: us.

SCIENCE

Science has from the beginning been about increasing human control over the rest of the world

With science, Perfect and Abstract Reason (scientific law, abstract economics) substituted a Perfect and Abstract Distant Sky God 

Most of scientific (and "common sense") arguments used to defend human supremacism are tautological: humans choose human characteristics as the measure of what characteristics define superiority. 

There's the absurd, racist and counterexperimental notion that, once again following the Great Chain of Being, scientist have a monopoly on understanding reality.

Because we think humans think with our brains, we humans have decided that brains and central nervous system are the only way that anyone can think and are therefore necessary for cognition. Therefore plants, not having brains and central nervous system, can't think. It's been proven. Thank goodness our supremacy withstood that one!

The fundamental assumption of supremacists is that until proven otherwise (and in fact, much longer) supremacists presume the other is not a subjective being.

It's what men and whites and the civilized have been doing since the beginnings of their respectives supremacies. It's what supremacists do.

To not be able to conceptualize or accept the existence of any form of intelligence that doesn't resemble your own doesn't seem to me very intelligent.

And to not be able to conceptualize or accept the existence of any form of suffering that doesn't resemble your own doesn't seem to me very compassionate or empathetic.

Enlightenment and its applied twin the Industrial Revolution have combined to become a possibly fatal disaster for life on earth.

- Enlightenment has destroyed our perception of the world as full of life and meaning and purpose
- The Industrial Revolution has used the tools of Enlightenment to accomplish this destruction in the real, physical world. The former provides the philosophical foundation and methods of the latter


QUESTIONING

When a supremacism of any sort is one of the unquestioned beliefs acting as a real authority of that culture, defenders of that supremacism nearly always perceive any questioning of any part of that supremacism as a "foolish distraction". They generally perceive and portray themselves as defenders of reasonableness and sanity, and perceive those questioning their supremacism as having come from the "nuthouse".

Because their supremacist perspective is unquestioned, all questioning of that supremacism by definition will be classed as speculation, and all speculation on that subject will be discouraged.

However, speculating about ways to escalate the ability of one's superior class to exploit all inferior classes is seen as innovation, creativity, and a sign of one's intelligence and superiority.

One of the problems with science is that it allows exploiters to pretend they're describing reality when they're speculating and projecting. Part of the point of any exploitative philosophy is to make the explotation seem natural or inevitable.

ANTHROPOMORPHIZING

The word means "to ascribe human characteristics to an animal, inanimate object, force of nature, etc".

This presumes a human ownership of intelligence, the ability to communicate, the ability to suffer, the ability to feel emotions, and so on. Any perception of these among nonhumans is to be eradicated. Never mind that these are all natural attributes. 

The Enlightenment and the Scientific Revolution are based on seeing the world as a giant machine, and nonhumans as "beast machines", as Descartes put it. Modern scientific discourse is based on machine language. But machines are a uniquely human-made project.

You can't get more anthropomorphic than to describe the world in mechanistic terms, to project a human construct onto the real, living world.

Isn't it just a tad anthropomorphic to requiere that everyone else's intelligence, response to pain, sorrow, joy, and so on, resemble one's own?

It's pleasing for those who wish to exploit others to create a Great Chain of Being and to place themselves at its earthly top. It's pleasing for those who wish to "exploit natural resources" to create a philosophy, a worldview, an ideology, and a theology which declares the world consists of "natural resources", not other beings, and to clasify evidence to the contrary as "speculation" or "philosophizing" or "anthropomorphizing".

    Science is a far better means of social control than Christianity. If you question Christianity you're merely consigned to a hell you don't believe in, but if you question science you must be just plain stupid. 

The fact that members of this culture have through cheating gained a competitive advantage over other humans and nonhuman beings in no way implies any form of greater intelligence or any other form of superiority. Cheating gains a competitive advantage at the cost of future extinction of those from whom the cheater is taking, and then also the cheater themselves.

It's nonsense to say that humans are the only creatures who use tools, especially when humans are routinely used as incubators, sprinklers, food and so on by nonhumans.

However, there's a sense in which it's easy for modern humans to accept that we're used as tools. Most people accept that the capitalist system uses them as tools. 

SCIENCE AS VALUE FREE

One of the myths of modern culture is that science is value free, which is not true. 

- Science is supposed to be "disintered", we always hear. If it's not "disinterested" then it's not science
- However, the practice of science in the 21st century is becoming shaped less by national priorities or by peer-review groups and more by the particular preferences of individuals with huge amounts of money

Industry, industrialist and the military-industrial complex have driven science from the beginning. It's only because we want to forget all this that we pretend science is disinterested in the first place. 

Research that in some way or another attempts to extend human control over the universe is considered value free. Attempts by humans to control the universe are in our very definition of how we know something is true. 

But extending human control over the universe is a value. And it's a value that materially benefits (in the short term, so long as you don't mind a murdered planet) the humans doing the research, and those funding the research, and those publishing the research, and those using the technologies that emerge from the research. They're not and can never be "disinterested". 

HUMAN FUNCTIONALITY 

Industrial humans are the only ones who exist. Human functionality is real. Functionality in the real, physical world is not real functionality. A river serves no purpose till it's harnessed for electricity, transportation, and irrigation. 

In this culture, only human-created function counts as true function, which means that only consciously-created function counts as true function. Since our boudes aren't considered "human", but only animal matter, our minds are what's important. 

Not only does how you perceive the world affect how you behave in the world, how you behave in the world further affects how you perceive the world.

Enslaving, torturing, and killing the world not only proceeds from but also helps create a religion, a science, a philosophy, an epistemology, a literature, in short, a culture, that declares humans to be superior to all other humans and human function to be real function and human meaning to be real meaning.

Among the many horrible experiments that scientist have done to rats, one of them is making them addicted to alcohol or drugs. Whatever validity these studies may have extends only to imprisioneed rats, because wild and free rats aren't interested in becoming addicted, as they presumably have better things to do. And what does that say about our way of life?

What supremacists regret is almost never the decisions they make that lead them to exploit and commit atrocities against others, nor the effects of their atrocities on everyone but themselves, but rather they regret only ways that prior exploitation has decreased their current capacity to exploit. 

MORTALITY 

All humans will eventually die. The knowledge that we all die is one of the primary causes of all monotheistic religions.

A fear of death and a yearning for immortality is also a primary motivator of much human supremacist science. Not only in its desire to assume the omnipotence, omniscience, and immortality of the Abrahmic God, but also in its attempts to mine all of the immortal nonhumans mentioned before to see how we can steal their immortality for our own. 




