CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS A BULLSHIT JOB?
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory
David Graeber

The defining feature of a bullshit job: one so completely pointless that even the person who has to perform it every day cannot convince themselves there's a good reason for them to be doing it. They might not be able to admit this to their coworkers (often there are very good reasons not to do so). But they are convinced the job is pointless nonetheless.

DEFINITION 1: a bullshit job is a form of employment that is so completely pointless, unnecessary, or pernicious that even the employee cannot justify its existence.

In the 21st century, even panzer divisions have come to be surrounded by a vast penumbra of sub-sub-sub and sub-sub-sub contractors. Tank commanders are obliged to perform complex and exotic bureaucratic rituals in order to move equipment from one room to another, even as those providing the paperwork secretly post elaborate complain to blogs about how idiotic the whole thing is.

**
We have created societies where much of the population, trapped in useless employment, have come to resent and despise equally those who do the most useful work in society, and those who do no paid work at all. 
**

Bullshit jobs are not just jobs that are useless or pernicious; typically, THERE HAS TO BE SOME DEGREE OF PRETENSE AND FRAUD INVOLVED AS WELL. The jobholder must feel obliged to pretend that there is, in fact, a good reason why their job exists, even if privately they find such claims ridiculous.

DEFINITION 2: A bullshit job is a form of employment that is so completely pointless, unnecessary, or pernicious that even the employee cannot justify its existence even though the employee feels obliged to pretend that this is not the case.

Most mafiosi belive they are part of an ancient and honorable tradition that is a value in its own right, whether or not it contributes to the larger social good. This is the reason why "feudal overlord" is not a bullshit job, either. 
Kings, earls, emperors, pasha, emirs, landlors and the like might, arguably, be useless people. Many of us would insist that they play pernicious roles in human affairs. BUT THEY DON'T THINK SO. 
MOST PEOPLE WHO DO A GREAT DEAL OF HARM IN THE WORLD ARE PROTECTED AGAINST THE KNOWLEDGE THAT THEY DO SO.
The more harm a category of powerful people do in the world, the more yes-men and propagandist will tend to accumulate around them, coming up with reasons why they are really doing good - and the more likely it is that at least some of those powerful people will believe them.
At the commanding heights of the financial system, we're not actually talking about bullshit jobs. We're not even talking about people who have come to believe their own propagandits. Really we're just talking about a bunch of crooks.

DEFINITION 3: A bullshit job is a form of paid employment that is so completely pointless, unnecessary, or pernicious that even the employee cannot justify its existence even though, as part of the conditions of employment, the employee feels obliged to pretend that this is not the case.

Since there is such a thing as social value (apart from mere market value), but since no one has ever figured out an adequate way to measure it, the worker's perspective is about as close as one is likely to get to an accurate assessment of the situation.
If the preponderance of those engaged in a certain occupation privately believe their work is of no social value, one should proceed along the assumption they are right.

Bullshit jobs often pay quite well and tend to offer excellent working conditions. They're just pointless. Shit jobs are usually not at all bullshit; they typically involve work that needs to be done and is clearly of benefit to society. It's just that the workers who do them are paid and treated badly.

Shit jobs tend to be blue collar and pay by the hour, whereas bullshit jobs tend to be white collar and salaried. Those who work shit jobs tend to be the object of indignities; they not only work hard but also are held in low esteem for that very reasotn. But at least they know they're doing something useful. Those who work bullshit jobs are often surrounded by honor and prestige; they are respected as professionals, well paid, and treated as high achievers (the sort of people who can be justly proud of what they do). Yet secretly they are aware that they have achieved nothing. They feel they have done nothing to earn the consumer toys with which they fill their lives; they feel it's all based on a lie, and it is.
THESE ARE TWO PROFOUNDLY DIFFERENT FORMS OF OPPRESSION.

While serving time in exile at a Siberian prision camp, Dostoyevsky developed the theory that the worst torture one could possibly devise would be to force someone to endlessly perform an obviously pointless task.

Three broad categories of jobs: 
- Useful jobs (which may or not be shit jobs)
- Bullshit jobs
- A small but ugly group made up of people who are basically just selfish bastards and don't really pretend to be anything else (gangsters, slumlords, top corporate lawyers, hedge fund CEOs)

Public and private bureaucracies have become so increasingly entangled that it's often very difficult to tell them apart.
The assumption that government is necessarily top-heavy with an unnecessary levels of administrative hierarchy, while the private sector is lean and mean, is by now so firmly lodged in people's heads that it seems no amount of evidence will displodge it.

(The giant bureaucracy of the Soviet Union) is always represented as exactly what would never happen under capitalism. But, just as Socialist regimes had created millions of dummy proletarian jobs, capitalist regimens somehow ended up creating millions of dummy white-collar jobs instead.

Beside government bureaucrats, when talking about bullshit jobs many will assume you must be talking about secretaries, receptionists and various sorts of (typically female) administrative staff. 
The assumption that it's mainly women who end up in bullshit jobs is not only sexist but also represents a profound ignorance of how most offices actually work.
Men are far more likely to feel that their jobs are pointles (42%) than women do (32%) (the source is the YouGov survey)

There are very few jobs that don't involve at least a few pointless or idiotic elements. To some degree, this is probably just the inevitable side effect of the workings of any complex organization.
The process of bullshitization is highly inconsistent. It has affected middle-class employment more than working-class employment. Within the working class, it has been traditionally female, caregiving work that has been the main target of bullshitization.
As a result, it's possible to say there are partly bullshit jobs, mostly bullshit jobs, and entirely bullshit jobs.

If 37 to 40% of jobs are completely pointless, and at least 50% of the work done in nonpointless office jobs is equally pointless, we can probably conclude that at least half of all work being done in our society could be eliminated without making any real difference at all.
We could easily become societies of leisure and institute a twenty-hour workweek. Maybe even a fifteen-hour week. Instead, we find ourselves condemned to spending most of our time at work, performing tasks that we feel make no difference in the world whatsoever.




