CHAPTER 3: WHAT IS IT LIKE TO HAVE A BULLSHIT JOB?
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory
David Graeber

With bullshit jobs you're working (or pretending to work) not for any good reason, but for the sake of working.
Who exactly is forcing you to pretend to work? The company? Society? Some strange confluence of social convention and economic forces that insist no one should be given the means of life without working, even if there isn't enough work to go around?

Bullshit jobs require maintaining a false front and playing a game of make-believe. The game has to be played in a context where you're not sure what the rules are, why it's being played, who's on your team and who isn't.

Most people in the world today are taught to see their work as their principal way of having an impact on the world. The fact that they are paid to do it is proof that their efforts do have some kind of meaningfull effect. There's an intense frustration of learning that they're paid to do nothing.

Stress is another theme that surrounds bullshit jobs. The amount of workplace aggression and stress is usually inversely correlated with the importance of the work they're doing.


Minor acts of sadism come with working in an office environment. Rituals of humilliation that allow supervisors to show who's boss in the most literal sense, putting the underling in their place. This justified by the sense that underlings are generically guilty at the very least of spiritual insubordination, of resenting the boss's tyranny. In the same way that police who beat suspects they know to be innocent will tell themselves the victim is undoubtedly guilty of something else. 

A THEORY OF SADO-MASOCHISM IN EVERYDAY LIFE (Jessica Benjamin)
Unlike members of actual BDSM subcultures (who are entirely aware of the fact that they're playing games of make-believe), "normal" people in hierarchical environments typically end up locked in a kind of pathological variation of the same sadomasochistic dynamic:
-   the bottom struggles desperately for approval that can never, by definition, be given
-   the top going to greater and greater lenghts to assert a dominance that both know is ultimately a lie (if the top were really all-powerful, they wouldn't need to go to such outrageous lenghts to ensure the bottom's recognition of their power)
In the play version, all the parameters are carefully worked out in advance by mutual consent, with both parties knowing the game can be called off at any moment simply by invoking an agreed-on safe-word.

In the work environment, supervisors never work out in advance in what ways employees can and can't be chewed out for different infractions, and if the employee is reprimanded or humilitated, they know there's nothing they can do to make it stop. There is no safe-word except "I quit", which breaks off the work relationship entirely and can have severe economic consequences for the former employee


ON THE MISERY OF NOT FEELING ENTITLED TO ONE'S MISERY

Just as a prisoner in solitary confinement inevitably begins to experience brain damage, the worker deprived of any sense of purpose often experiences mental and physical atrophy.

Even in relatively benign office environments, the lack of sense of purpose eats away at people. It leaves workers struggling with feelings of emptiness or worthlesness. These feelings are increased by the prestige, respect and generous compensation that such positions often confer. 

    The job itself may be unnecessary, but it's hard to see it as a bad thing if it allows you to feed your children. You might ask what kind of economic system creates a world where the only way to feed one's childer is to spend most of one's waking hours engaged in useless box-ticking exercises or solving problems that shouldn't exist. 


Right-scolding: political discourse that consists of lecturing others about what jerks they are to think they have a right to something.
In most wealthy countries, most of people in their 20s represent the first generation in more thatn a century that can expect opportunities and living standards substantially worse than those enjoyed by their parents. Yet at the same time, they're lectured relentlessly from left and right on their sense of entitlement for feeling they might deserve anything else. This makes it especially difficult for younger people to complain about meaningless employment.

CREATIVITY AS RESISTANCE

It's hard to imagine anything more soul destroying than being forced to commit acts of arbitrary bureaucratic cruelty against one's will. To become the face of the machine that one despises. To become a monster.

Many report art, music, writing or poetry as an antidote to the pointlessness of their "real" paid work. 

However, it's difficult to repurpose the time spent trapped in offices doing nothing. This sparked an efflorescence of social media: forms of electronic media that lend themselves to being produced and consumed while pretending to do something else. 

