CHAPTER 6: WHY DO WE AS A SOCIETY NOT OBJECT TO THE GROWTH OF POINTLESS EMPLOYMENT?
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory
David Graeber


There's a very long theological tradition of valorizing work as a sacred duty, at once a curse and blessing, and seeing humans as inherently sinful, lazy beings who can be expected to shirk that duty if they can.
Many economic concepts trace back directly to religious ideas. 

In public debate, all work must be treated as sacred duty, and therefore any work is always preferable to no work at all. But when it comes to our jobs, we tend to apply a very different criteria. We expect a job to serve some purpose or have some meaning and we're deeply demoralized if we find it doesn't.

People have a notion of the social value of their work; but our society has reached the point where not only is the social value of work usually in inverse proportion to its economic value, but many people have come to accept this situation as morally right, they believe this is how things should be. That we SHOULD reward useless or even destructive behavior and punish those whose daily labors make the world a better place.


DEFINING A MEASURE OF VALUE

Economist measure value in terms of what they call "utility": the degree to which a good or service is useful in satisfying a want or a need. 
Since there's no scientific definition of what a "human need" actually is (beyond the body's minimal caloric requirements and a few other physical factors), the definition is always subjective. To a large degree, needs are just other people's expectations 
Most economists conclude that there's no point in judging what people "should" want; better to just accept that they DO want and then judge how effectively (rationally) they set about pursuing their desires.

Labor Theory of Value
- Has its roots at least to the European Middle Ages
- Is based on the assumption that the real value of a commodity is the work that has been invested in making its existence possible

Considering value is subjective, everyone shoudl operate on the assumption that if there's a market for a given good or service (including financial services), then it's clearly valuable to someone, and that's all one needs to know
But the market is not an infallible arbiter of value. The problem is that nothing else is, either.

The idea that the market can undervalue or overvalue things has been with us for a long time and it's part of our common sense. It would be impossible for anyone to say they've been ripped off or got a good deal without this.
What money brings to the table is the ability to make precise quantitative comparisons. The market value of a commodity is the degree to which it can be compared to(and exchanged for) something else

- We speak of "value" when talking about economic affairs, where people are paid for their work or when their actions are directed towards getting money. Commodities have economic "value" because they can be compared precisely with other commodities
- "Values" are valuable because they can't be compared with anything. They're each considered unique, incommensurable, priceless. For example, housework and child care (family care) are the most common forms of unpaid work. Charitable works, political volunteering, artistic and scientific pursuits are equally unremunerated


THE INVERSE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE SOCIAL VALUE OF WORK AND THE MONEY YOU'RE LIKELY TO BE PAID FOR IT 

The way this economy works, if you spend your like caring for others, you'll end up so underpaid and so deeply in debt that you won't be able to care for your own family. There's a deep sense of rage at the injustice from this arrangement.
Most people not only acknowledge this but also feel this is how things ought to be. That virtue should be its own reward, as the ancient Stoics argued. 

    There is a sense that those who choose to benefit society, and especially those who have the gratification of KNOWING they benefit society, really have no business also expecting middle-class salaries, paid vacations and generous retirement packages.
    There is also a feeing that those who have to suffer from the knowledge they're doing pointless or even harmful work just for the sake of money should be rewarded with more money for exactly that reason.

There's an idea that the collective sacrifice for the common good SHOULD fall disproportionately on those who are already, by their choice of work, engaged in sacrifice for the common good. Or who simply have the gratification of knowing their work is productive and useful. 
This can only make sense if we assume that work (more specifically, paid work) is a value in itself. So much a value in itself that the motives of the person taking the job and the effects of the work are, at best, secondary considerations.

    There seems to be a broad consesnsus not so much that is work is good but that NOT WORKING IS VERY BAD, that anyone who is not slaving away harder than they'd like at something they don't especially enjoy is a bad person, a parasite unworthy of sympathy or public relief.

Work-as-an-end-in-itself morality: the pressure to value ourselvess and others on the basis of how hard we work at something we'd rather not be doing. This is one of the guiding principles of social relations: if you're not destroying your mind and body via paid work, you're not living right.

    If the value of work is in part the fact that it's "something we'd rather not be doing", it stands to reason that anything we would wish to be doing is less like work and more like play, or a hobby, or something we might consider doing in our spare time, and therefore less deserving of material reward. Probably we shouldn't be paid for it at all.
    
How have so many humans reached the point where they accept that even miserable, unnecessary work is actually morally superior to no work at all?


THE THEOLOGICAL ROOTS OF OUR ATTITUTES TOWARD LABOR 

In both the story of the Garden of Eden and in the myth of Prometheus, the fact that humans have to work is seen as their punishment for having defied a divine Creator. But at the same time, work itself (which gives humans the ability to produce food, clothing, cities, etc) is presented as a more modest instantiantion of the divine power of Creation itself. 

Common definition of work: something no one would ordinarily wish to be doing for its own sake (punishment), and something we do anyway to accomplish something beyond the work itself (creation). But most work can't be said to "create" anything, most of it is maintaining and rearranging things.

From the book of Genesis, God condemns men to work the soil and women to bear children with great pain. Male "productive" labor is being framed as the equivalent of childbirth, which from a male point view can be as close to creation from nothing that they can perform. And that is also painful "labor".

"Production" is simultaneously a variation on a male fantasy of childbirth, and the action of a male Creator God who similarly created the entire universe through the sheer power of his mind and words. Just as men see themselves as creating the world from their minds and words, leaving to women most of the actual labor of tidying and maintaining things to make this illusion possible.

Most of the core assumptions of modern economics orginally trace back to theological arguments. For example, Saint Augustine's argument taht we are cursed with infinite desires in a finite world and are naturally in a situation of competition with one another. This has become the basis for the assumption that rational human action is largely a matter of "economizing", the optimal allocation of scarce resources by rational actors in a competitive world.


SERVICE IN FEUDAL SOCIETY

Feudal society had a "life-cycle" of service. Almost everyone was expected to spend roughly the first 7 to 15 years of their working life as a servant in someone else's household. Service was expected equally from boys and girls, and was usually expected even of the elite.

Generally, servants were paid and expected to save a good share of their wages. They were acquiring both the knowledge and experiene needed to manage a household, shop or farm, and also the wealth needed to acquire one. Service was seen above all as the process whereby young people learned not only their trade, but the "manners", the appropiate behavior of a responsible adult.

What we consider paid work and what we consider education were seen as largely the same thing. Both were a process of learning self-discipline, about "achieving mastery over one's base desires", and learning how to behave like a proper self-contained adult. 

This changed with the advent of capitalism. Capitalism understood as the gradual transformation of relations of service into permanent relations of wage labor (meaning a relation between some people who owned capital and others who didn't and were obliged to work for them). 

In humans terms, millions of people found themselves trapped in permanent social adolescence. They were expected to live their entire lives effectively as unfinished human beings. Inevitably, many began to rebel, marrying early, abandoning their masters and setting up cottages and families of their own. This set off a wave of moral panic among the emerging employing class reminiscent of later moral panics about teenage pregnancy.
It's at this moment that we can speak of the birth of the proletariat as a class, a term derived from a Latin word meaning "those who produce offspring".

The Puritan ideal was for suh "masterless men" to be rounded up and placed under the stern discipline of a pious household whose patriarch could direct them in work and prayer. This was the first of a long history of attempts to reform the manners of the lower class, where the poor were taught proper time discipline, similar to government programs today. 

    Why, starting in the 16th century, did the middle class suddenly develop such an interest in reforming the moral comportment of the poor, a subject they hadn't previously found of much interest?
    In the context of life-cycle service it makes sense. The poor were seen as frustrated adolescents.

After the industrial revolution, the celebration of work was taken up with renew vigor by Methodist and by educated middle-class circles. Thomas Carlyle insisted that labor shouldn't be seen as a way to satisfy material needs, but as the essence of life itself. God had intentionally created the world unfinished so as to allow humans the opportunity to complete His work through labor.

The conclusions of Carlyle were that if work is noble, then the most noble work should NOT be compensated, since it's obscene to put a price on something of such absolute value. Though he was generous enough to allow that the poor did need to be afforded "fair wages" in order to obtain the means to live.

In the 19th century, the theory of labor (where all wealth derives from labor) was universally accepted as ordinary common sense. Work was a sacred duty and a claim to moral and political superiority over the idle rich. Work was both a value in itself and the only real producer of value.

In the immediate wake of the Civil War all this began to change with the first stirrings of large-scale bureaucratic, corporate capitalism. The idea change to capital creating wealth and prosperity, not labor. Steel magnate Andrew Carnegie was a cultural leader of this idea, pushing what we now call "consumerism": the productivity of concetrated capital in the hands of capable few would lower the price of commodities that the workers of tomorrow would live as well as the kings of the past.

The promulgation of consumerism also coincided with the beginnings of the managerial revolution. The new bureaucratically organized corporations with "scientific management" wanted to turn workers into extensions of the machinery, their every move predetermined by someone else.

The source of status was no longer the ability to make things but the ability to purchase them. With this, the theory of value fell so much away from popular common sense that nowadays only graduate students or Marxist theorist have heard of it. Nowadays, if someone speaks fo "wealth producers", people automatically assume they're referring to capitalist, no workers.

For the next century, labor organizing tended to focus on factory workers, which lead to the situation we have now where invoking the term "working class" instantly draws up the image of men toiling on production lines. This has lead to intelligent middle-class intelectuals to suggest that, with the decline of factory work, the working class no longer exists.

In fact, there was never a time most workers worked in factories. Most working-class labor actually resembles what we archetypically think of as women's work: looking after people, seeing to their wants and needs, explaining, reassuring, anticipating what the boss wants or is thinking, caring for, monitoring and maintaining plants, animals, machines and other objects.

    In the same way as women's unpaid caring labor is made to disappear from our accounts of "the economy", so are the caring aspects of other working-class jobs made to disappear as well. 
    "Caring labor" is generally seen as work directed at other people, and it always involves a certain labor of interpretation, empathy and understanding. To some degree, one might argue that this is not really work at all, it's just life as humans are naturally empathetic creatures.

The real point is philosophical. It's a recognition that the world we inhabit is something we made, collectively, as a society, and therefore, that we could also have made differently. 
TOGETHER WE CREATE THE WORLD WE INHABIT. 
We can all imagine a better world. Why can't we just create one? Why does it seem so inconceivable to just stop making capitalism? Or government? Or at the very least bad service providers and annoying bureaucratic red tape?

Caring for others, especially over the long term, requires maintaining a world that's relatively predictable as the grounds on which caring can take place. You can't save for the education of your children unless you're sure in 20 years there will still be colleges, and money. And that meas that love for others (people, animals, landscapes) regularly requires the maintenance of institutional structures one might otherwise despise.


WORK AS A FOR OF DISCIPLINE AND SELF-sacrifice

Captains of industry all over the world have been able to convince the public that they, and not those they employ, are the real creators of prosperity. How are workers supposed to find meaning and purpose in jobs where they are effectively being turned into robots?

The obvious answer is to fall back on the old idea that work forms character, and that is what seems to have happened. A fusion of the Christian doctrine of the curse of Adam with the Northern European notion that paid labor under a master's discipline is the only way to become a genuine adult. This made it easy for workers to see their work as self-abnegation, a sacrifice of joy and pleasure that allows us to become an adult worthy of our consumerist toys.

No longer were we to think of ourselves as expressing our being through what we produced, but rather, through what we consumed. Especially since the 70s, everyone has been expected to sort themselves out into tribal subcultures as sci-fi geeks, dog lovers, stoners, Chicago Bulls fans but not as longshoremen or Catastrophe Risk Analysts. And it's true that on one level, most of us do prefer to think of ourselves as being defined by anything other than our jobs.

    To be denied work is to be denied far more than the things that work can buy; it's to be denied the ability to define and respect one's self.

Work is considered less and less as a means to an end (a way of obtaining resources and experiences to pursue projects) and more and more as an end in itself. If work is a form of self-sacrifice, then the very awfulness of modern work IS what makes it possible to see it as an end in itself. We have returned to Carlyle: work should be painful, the misery of the job is itself what "forms character". Workers gain feelings of dignity and self-worth BECAUSE they hate their job.

The sadomasochist element in work described in chapter 4, rather than being an ugly side effect to top-down chains of command in the workplace has actually become central to what validates work itself.

    People are faced with the choice between doing useful and important work like taking care of children but being effectively told that the gratification of helping others should be its own reward, and it's up to them to figure out how to pay the bills. Or accepting pointless and degrading work that destroys their mind and body for no particular reason, other than a widespread feeling that if one does not engage in labor that destroys the mind and body, whether or not there is a reason to be doing it, ONE DOES NOT DESERVE TO LIVE.













