It's as if someone were out there making up pointless jobs just for the sake of keeping us all working. 

There seems to be a general rule that, the more obviously one's work benefits other people, the less one is likely to be paid for it. Even more perverse, there seems to be a broad sense that this is the way things should be. 

A bullshit job is a form of paid employment that is so completely pointless, unnecessary, or pernicious that even the employee cannot justify its existence even though, as part of the conditions of employment, the employee feels obliged to pretend that this is not the case.

We have created societies where much of the population, trapped in useless employment, have come to resent and despise equally those who do the most useful work in society, and those who do no paid work at all. 

The underlying assumption is that if humans are offered the option to be parasites, of course they'll take it. Almost every bit of evidence indicates that this is not the case.

Working serves a purpose, or is meant to do so. Being forced to pretend to work just for the sake of working is an indignity, since the demand is perceived as the pure excercise of power for its own sake.

The message of the modern "If you have time to lean, you have time to clean" is not that you should be working but that you shouldn't be doing anything else.

The idea that dutiful sumbission even to meaningless work under another's autority is a form of moral self-discipline that makes you a better person. What "proper work ethic" means is obedience.

Under classic capitalist conditions it makes no sense to hire unnecessary workers. Maximizing profits means paying the least number of workers the least amount of money possible. In a very competitive market, those who hire unnecessary workers are not likely to survive. So our economy can't be riddled with bullshit jobs, it must be an illusion.

If the existence of bullshit jobs seems to defy the logic of capitalism, one possible reason might be that the existing system isn't capitalism.

It's a system of rent extraction where the internal logic is profoundly different from capitalism, since economic and political imperatives merge. It resembles classic medieval feudalims, displaying the same tendency to create endless hierarchies of lords, vassals and retainers.

There's a very long theological tradition of valorizing work as a sacred duty, at once a curse and blessing, and seeing humans as inherently sinful, lazy beings who can be expected to shirk that duty if they can. Many economic concepts trace back directly to religious ideas.

our society has reached the point where not only is the social value of work usually in inverse proportion to its economic value, but many people have come to accept this situation as morally right, they believe this is how things should be. That we should reward useless or even destructive behavior and punish those whose daily labors make the world a better place.

There seems to be a broad consesnsus not so much that is work is good but that not working is very bad, that anyone who is not slaving away harder than they'd like at something they don't especially enjoy is a bad person, a parasite unworthy of sympathy or public relief.

The less the value of work is seen to lie either in what it produces, or the benefits it provides to others, the more work comes to be seen as valuable primarily as a form of self-sacrifice, which means that anything that makes that work more enjoyable (even the gratification of knowing that one's work benefits others) is actually seen to lower its value, and as a result, to justify lower levels of pay. 

These work arrangements create a political landscape filled with hatred and resentment

The main rule is that anyone pursuing a useful or high-minded line of work, but who also expects comfortable levels of pay and benefits is a legitimate target of resentment.

All the objects of resentment mentioned so far can be seen as violations of the principle of inverse relation of compensation and social benefit.

Since at least the Great Depression, we've been hearing warnings that automation was about to cause mass unemployment. And automation did lead to mass unemployment. We have simply stopped it by adding dummy jobs that are effectively made up:

    A combination of political pressure from both right and left,
    a deeply held popular feeling that paid employment alone can make one a full moral person,
    and a fear on part of the upper classes of what the laboring masses might get up to if they had too much leisure on their hands has ensured that the unemployment figures in wealthy countries should be between 3 and 8%.

What would Universal Basic Income would look like?

- You start by giving everyone an equal amount of money. This is impportant in itself because money has a certain symbolic power: it's something that's the same for everyone. And when you give everyone, men, women, old, young, high caste, low caste, exactly the same amount, those differences start to dissolve.
- Any UBI payment would have to be enough to live on, all by itself, and it would have to be completely unqualified. Everyone has to get it. Even people who don't need it. It's worth it just to establish the principle that when it comes to what's required to live, everyone deserves it equally, without qualification. This makes it a human right, not just charity or duct tape for lack of other forms of Income

Even a modest Basic Income program could become a stepping-stone toward the most profound transformation of all: to unlatch work from livelihood entirely. A full Basic Income would eliminate the compulsion to work, by offering a reasonable standard of living to all, and leaving up to each individual to decide what they wished to do with their time.

Another consequences of Basic Income would be the disappearing of the sadomasochistic dynamic of hierarchical work arrangement we see today.