FALLING IN LOVE
The 5 Love Languages
Gary Chapman

Most of us enter marriage by way of the "in love" experience. We meet someone whose physical characteristics and personality traits create enough electrical shock to trigger our "love alert" system.

At its peak, the "in love" experience is euphoric. We are emotionally obsessed with each other. The person who is "in love" has the illusion that their beloved is perfect. 

    We have been led to believe that if we're really in love, it will last forever. 
    The eternality of the "in love" experience is fiction, not fact. The average life span of a romantic obsession is 2 years.

The euphoria of the "in love" state gives us the illusion that we have an intimate relationship. We feel that we belong to each other, that we can conquer all problems. We feel altruistic toward each other. The reason we can do this so freely is that we sincerely believe that our lover feels the same way towards us. 

Once the experience of falling in love has run its natural course (average of 2 years), we will return to the world of reality and begin to assert ourselves. 

Little by little, the illusion of intimacy evaporates, and the individual desires, emotions, thoughts, and behavior patterns exert themselves. At that point either they withdraw, separate, divorce and set off in search of a new in-love experience, or they begin the hard work of learning to love each other without the euphoria of the in-love obsessinn.

Psychiatrist Scott Peck concludes that the falling-in-love experience is not real for 3 reasons:
- Falling in love is not an act of will or a conscious choice.
- Falling in love is not real love because it's effortless. As the instinctual nature of the bird dictates the building of a nest, so the instinctual nature of the in-love experience pushes us to do outlandish and unnatural things for each other. 
- The in-love experience doesn't focus on our own growth nor on the growth and development of the other person. Rather, it gives us the sense that we have arrived and don't need further growth.

We can recognize the in-love experience for what it is (a temporary emotional high), and now pursue "real love" with our partner. This involves an act of will and requires discipline, and it recognizes the need for personal growth. 

    I need to be loved by someone who chooses to love me, who sees in me something worth loving. This kind of love requires effort and discipline.
