LOVE LANGUAGE #1: WORDS OF AFFIRMATION
The 5 Love Languages
Gary Chapman

One way to express love emotionally is to use words that build up. Verbal compliments (or words of appreciation) are powerful communicators of love. They're best expressed in simple, straightforward statements of affirmation. 

    The object of love is not getting something you want but doing something for the well-being of the one you love. It's a fact, however, that when we receive affirming words we are far more likely to be motivated to reciprocate.

ENCOURAGING WORDS

Giving verbal compliments is only one way to express words of affirmation to your partner. Another dialect is encouraging words. 

Your words may give your partner the courage necessary to take that first step.

Take note that this is not about pressuring your partner to do something that you want. It's about encouraging them to develop an interest that they already have.

    Encouraging requires empathy and seeing the world from your partner's perspective. We must first learn what's important to our partner. 

KIND WORDS

Sometimes our words are saying one thing, but our tone of voice is saying another. We're sending double messages. Our partner will usually interpret our message based on our tone of voice, not the words we use. 

We can't erase the past, but we can accept it as history. We can choose to live today free from the failures of yesterday. 

    Forgiveness is not a feeling, it's a commitment. It's a choice to show mercy, not to hold the offense up against the offender. Forgiveness is an expression of love. 

HUMBLE WORDS

Love makes requests, not demands. When I demand things from my partner, I become a parent and they the child.

If we are to develop an intimate relationship, we need to know each other's desires. If we wish to love each other, we need to know what the other person wants. 

The way we express those desires is all-important. If they come across as demands, we have erased the possibility of intimacy and will drive our partner away. If we make known our needs and desires as requests, we're giving guidance, not ultimatums.
    
    When you make demands, you have become not a lover but a tyrant. Your partner will feel belittled, not affirmed. A request introduces the element of choice.

To know that my partner loves me enough to respond to one of my requests communicates emotionally that they care about me, respect me, admire me, and want to do something to please me.

If your partner's love language is Words of Affirmation:
1. Set a goal to give your partner a different compliment each day for one month. 
2. Write a love letter, a love paragraph, or a love letter to your partner and give it quietly or with fanfare. 
3. Compliment your partner in presence of their parents and friends. 
4. Look for your partner's strengths and tell them how much you appreciate those strengths. 
5. Always remember: WORDS ARE IMPORTANT!

