LOVE LANGUAGE #2: QUALITY TIME
The 5 Love Languages
Gary Champman

Quality time doesn't mean that we have to spend our together moments gazing into each other's eyes. It mean we're doing something together and that we're giving our full attention to the other person. The activity is a vehicle that creates a sense of togetherness. 

    When we sit and talk for 20 minutes deeply engaged with one another, we're giving each other 20 minutes of life. We're giving our lives to each other. This is a powerful emotional communicator of love. 

QUALITY CONVERSATION

Quality conversation: sympathetic dialogue where 2 individuals are sharing their experiences, thoughts, feelings and desires in a friendly, uninterrupted context. 

Quality conversation is quite different from the first love language. Words of affirmation focus on what we're SAYING; quality conversation focuses on what we're HEARING.

A relationship calls for sympathetic listening with a view to understanding the other person's thoughts, feelings, and desires. We must be willing to give advice but only when it's requested and never in a condescending manner.

- Maintain eye contact when your partner is talking. 
- Don't listen to your partner and do something else at the same time. 
- Listen for feelings. Ask yourself, "What emotion is my partner experiencing?". When you think you have the answer, confirm it asking them about it. 
- Observe body language. Ask for clarification to make sure you know what they're really thinking and feeling. 
- Refuse to interrupt them. The goal is to understand them, not to defend ourselves or correct them. 

LEARNING TO talk

Quality conversation requires not only sympathetic listening but also self-revelation. 
In each of life's events, we have emotions, thoughts, desires and eventually actions. It's the expression of that process taht we call self-revelation. 

If you need to learn the language of quality conversation, begin by noting the emotions you feel: 3 times a day, ask yourself: "What emotions have I felt in the last 3 hours?". This allows you to develop an awareness of your emotional nature. 
For example: 
Event: traffic 
Emotion: anger/frustration
Event: boss moving a deadline
Emotion: anxious and disappointment
Using your list, communicate your emotions and the events briefly with your partner as many days as possible. In a few weeks, you'll become comfortable expressing your emotions with them. 

    One way to learn new patterns is to establish a daily sharing time in which each of you will talk about 3 things that happenned to you that day and how you feel about them

QUALITY ACTIVITIES

Quality activities may include anything in which one or both of you have an interest. The emphasis is not on what you're doing but on why you're doing it. 
The essential ingredients in a quality activity are:
- At least one of you wants to do it. 
- The other is willing to do it. 
- Both of you know why you're doing it: to express love by being together. 

One of the by-products of quality activites is that they provide a memory bank from which to draw in the years ahead. 

If your partner's love language is Quality Time:
1. Take a walk together through the old neighborhood where one of you grew up. Ask questions about your partner's childhood. 
2. Ask your partner for a list of 5 activities that they would enjoy doing with you. Make plans to do one of them each month for the next 5 months. 
3. Ask your partner where they enjoy sitting when talking with you. Later on ask them to join you on the place of their choice to sit and talk. 
4. Plan a weekend getaway sometime within the next 6 months. 
5. Make time every day to share with each other some of the events of the day. 
6. Have a "Let's review our history" evening once every 3 months. Set aside an hour to focus on each other's history. Select 5 questions for each of you to answer (for example, Who was your best and worst teacher in school and why? When did you feel your parents were proud of you? What's the worst mistake your mother/father ever made?). 
After answering the 5 questions, stop and decide on the 5 questions you'll ask next time. 


