THE PRINCESS DIARIST
Carrie Fisher 

If I'd been in high school instead of doing shows with my mother, I'd have had appropiate venues for my adolescent feelings to emerge. I would  have lived a life as a teenager, but since I wasn't  living that life, I kept having crushes on gay men.

The hairstyle that was chosen would impact how everyone -every filmgoing human- would envision me for the rest of my life. (And probably even beyond, it's hard to imagine any TV obituary not using a photo of that cute little rounded-faced girl with goofy buns on either side of her inexperieced head.)

I had endless issues with my appearance in Star Wars. Real ones, not ones you bring up so people think you're humble because you secretly find yourself adorable. What I saw in the mirror is not apparently what many teenage boys saw. If I'd known about all the masturbating I would generate (well, that would've been extraordinarily weird from many angles and I'm glad it didn't come up, as it were). But when men -fifty-year old-plus down to ... well, the age goes pretty low for statutory comfort- when men approach me to let me knw that I was their first love, let's just say I have mixed feelings. Why did all these men find it so easy to be in love with men then and so complex to be in love with me now?

    Back then I was always looking ahead to who I wanted to be versus who I didn't realize I already was, and the wished-for me was most likely based on who other people seemed to be and the desire to have the same effect on others that they had had on me. 

I was precocious, but how many years beyond your teens can you be called that with sincerity?

I think boys may have been attracted to my accessibility. Even if I did have some princessy qualities, I wasn't conventionally beautiful and sexy, and as such was less likely to put them down or think I was too good for them. I wouldn't humiliate them in any way. Even if I teased them in the context of running around with laser guns dodging bullets, I wouldn't do it in a way that would hurt them. 

It was ONE MOVIE. It wasn't supposed to do what it did-nothing was supposed to do THAT. Nothing ever had. Movies were meant to stay on the screen, flat and large and colorful, gathering you up into their sweep of story, carrying you rollicking along to the end, then releasing you back into your unchanged life. But this movie misbehaved. It leaked out of the theater, poured off the screen, affected a lot of people so deeply that they required endless talismans and artifacts to stay connected to it. 

It is certainly a higher form of prostitution: the exchange of a signature for money, as opposed to a dance or a grind. Instead of stripping off clothes, the celebrity removes the distance created by film or stage. Both traffic in intimacy. 

If you can find a common language that runs from five to eighty-five, you've got yourself something, and Star Wars fans have something. In a way, it's as if they know they have this great gift to bestow, and they want to bestow it as perfectly as possible-the perfect time, the perfect place, the perfect situation for passing on this life-defining experience. And the kids will always remember for their entire lives how they first felt when they first saw their favorite movie. And they were given this gift from their parents, and can now share it together. Truly a family affair. 

Capable, reliable, equal if not better than a man. I'm sure I didn't pay enough attention to what things were like BL (Before Leia), but the movie came out at the same time as a popular slogan of the day, "A woman without a man is like a fish without a bicycle," and many females of all ages seem to have been glad I'd arrived on the scene, a heroine for our time. 

Star Wars gives me a feeling of... ongoingness, you know?  Like it's been here, and it's still here, and it'll stay here.

Because-well, I just said why. Because of the Force. Becuase it moves through you and around you and into the person standing across from you. It's like this thing my mom used to say: 'I salute the light of the God within you.' THAT's the Force to me. I salute the light of the Force within and without you. The light that shines away from the dark side. Whatever it is that the Force wills, I will. I will its will. Its will, not mine, be done. Give me the knowledge of the all-knowing Force-give me the power to carry out the will of the Force. I thank the Force for empowering me with the light that shines its forceful rays on me, through me, and to infinity. May this force be with us all. 

