WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- NOBODY KNOWS

Underlings get a reputation for being duplicitous because they sometimes resort to indirect means when straight forward ones are not available. When I was an underling, the only way I knew to make a man stop grabbing me was to trick a more powerful man into laying down the law. I had no authority, or had reason to believe I had none.

It's an old truism that knowledge is power. The inverse and opposite possibility (that power is often ignorance) is rarely aired.

Every subordinate has a strategy for survival, which relies, in part, on secrecy. Every unequal system preserves that secrecy and protects the powerful: better the sergeant not know how the privates tolerate him, the master not know that the staff have lives beyond servitude and, perhaps, scorn for whom they serve with apparent deference.

    When the powerful insist that nobody knows, what they mean is that their acts are witnessed by nobodies. Nobody knows.

Abuse, denigration, and assault had long been regarded as officially unacceptable but permissible as long as the public didn't know that those in charge had been aware. A CHANGE IN WHO IS AUDIBLE IS A CHANGE IN WHO IS SOMEBODY.

So often a man who believes that women have no voice is indignant when he discovers that someone is listening to them.

We talk about empathy and compassion as virtues, but they are also active practices of paying attention to other people. I PAY ATTENTION TO YOU BECAUSE YOU MATTER, AND IF YOU IGNORE ME, IT'S BECAUSE I DON'T.

"While people usually gain power through traits and actions that advance the interest of others (such as empathy, collaboration, sharing), when they start to feel powerful or enjoy a position of privilege, those qualities begin to fade. The powerful are more likely than other people to engage in rude, selfish, and unethical behavior".
- Dacher Keltner

If power generates a cushion of obliviousness around itself, those of us with power need to counter it. That means, first, treating people with respect, regardless of their status. It also means being critical of the forces taht create inequality and remembering that they create asymmetries of audibility and impact. 
Perhaps we don't know ourselves unless we know others. And if we do, we know that nobody is a nobody. 


