WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- THEY THINK THEY CAN BULLY THE TRUTH

There are among us people who assume their authority is so great they can dictate what happened: that their assertions will override witnesses, videotapes, evidence and historical record. That theirs is the only voice that matters.

That victims will remain voiceless was the presumption behind much of the sexual abuse that's been uncovered in the #MeToo era. Getting away with it is the same thing as assuming that no one will know, because your victims will be intimidated or shamed into silence, or that if they speak up they can be discredited or menaced back into silence, or that even if they don't shut up no one will believe them because your credibility crushes theirs.

There are lies subordinates tell to avoid culpability, but they tend to be about specific things (I didn't eat the cake, I didn't show up late) or survival (I'm not undocumented), while these fact-bullies force responses on others, as when a menacing father insists that his whole family pretend that everything is fine and they adore him and last night didn't happen.

A right to impunity: a right to do what you like and dictate the reality around it, a right to confront no competing versions, even from the other parties involved.

Feminism, like many other human-rights movements, has been a process of amplifying voices until they can hold their own, and of solidarity, so that small voices can be cumulatively loud enough to counter the dictactors. 

    Perhaps rather than power, we should talk about POWERS, the ones we can generate ourselves and the ones that people give to us or withold from us. The power of being believed is distributed as unequally as any out there.
    We are in an era of levelling out who has this precious asset. Credibility is not inherent, it resides in how people respond.

"A totalitarian state is in effect a theocracy, and its ruling caste, in order to keep its position, has to be thought of as infallible. But since, in practice, no one is infallible, it is frequently necessary to rearrange past events in order to show that this or that mistake was not made, or that this or that imaginary triumph actually happened.… Totalitarianism demands, in fact, the continuous alteration of the past, and in the long run probably demands a disbelief in the very existence of objective truth."
- George Orwell

“The ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the convinced Nazi or the convinced Communist, but people for whom the distinction between fact and fiction (i.e., the reality of experience) and the distinction between true and false (i.e., the standards of thought) no longer exist.” 
- Hannah Arendt
