WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- THE FALL OF MEN HAS BEEN GREATLY EXAGGERATED

There's an old habit of mysogynist men of asserting that women are not to be believed, but men are. There is a long, brutal tradition of asserting that men are credible but women are not. Men are objective, women are subjective. 

For a long time women who had been sexually assaulted had the facts on their side, but the men who assaulted them and accomplices of those men controlled the narrative, including the business of who would be heard and believed.

We officially condemn rape and molestation, harassment and abuse, but too many within that "we" have also often insisted that those things didn't happen when they did, and this denial is part of the fiction that men are objective, women are subjective, so subjective we must find them crazy, delusional, or maybe drunk at the time and prone to mistaken identity.

We undermine the victim's ability to trust her own perception and capacity, as well as handicapping her ability to function in social and professional arenas.

Our society defines truth as a valuable possession, of which some people have inherent ownership and others do not, no matter what has transpired and who's raped or lynched whom and what the evidence might show.

Men with power magnify other men with power, sometimes by commissioning articles by or in defense of men who've assaulted women and making verbal attacks on those women who were physically attacked or those who spoke up for them.

    In the legal system we settle not for truth but for who can more forcefully argue.

"Until the lion learns how to write, every story will glorify the hunter" says an African proverb. But what if the lionesses write eloquently but the editors prefer the hunters' version? Shutting up lionesses is standard, and so is exonerating hunters.

We see that the men who have had the power to abuse women's bodies and psyches throughout their careers are in many cases also the ones in charge of our political and cultural stories. 

One of the rights that the powerful often assume is the power to dictate reality. 