WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- LET THIS FLOOD OF WOMEN'S STORIES NEVER CEASE

There’s a problem with the way feminism moves forward in reaction to breaking news stories. It brings focus to a single predator, a single incident, and people who haven’t faced the pervasiveness of misogyny can build stories around it as to why this was an exception, not the rule, or the act by a member of a subcategory we can dismiss or demonize. 

But these are the norms, not the aberrations. This is a society still permeated and shaped and limited by misogyny, among other afflictions. Not all men, but enough to impact virtually all women.

Women spend their lives negotiating survival and bodily integrity and humanity in the home, on the streets, in workplaces, at parties, and now on the internet. 

But here's a thing you might have forgotten about women being menaced or assaulted or beaten or raped: we think we might be murdered before it’s over. I have. There’s often a second layer of threat “if you tell.” From your assailant or from the people who don’t want to hear about what he did and what you need. Patriarchy kills off stories and women to maintain its power. If you’re a woman, this stuff shapes you; it scars you, it tells you that you are worthless, no one, voiceless, that this is not a world in which you are safe or equal or free. That your life is something someone else may steal from you, even a complete stranger, just because you’re a woman. This society that is itself a system of punishment for being a woman.

We treat the physical assault and the silencing after as two separate things, but they are the same. Domestic violence and rape are acts that say the victim has no rights, not to self-determination or bodily integrity or dignity. That is a brutal way to be made voiceless, to have no say in your life and fate. Then, to not be believed or to be humiliated or punished or pushed out of your community or your family is to be treated the same way over again.

This level of malevolence from our prominent men is not supposed to be normal, even when we have so many stories confirming that it is. So many women who told stories about men trying to harm them were treated as crazy or as malicious liars, because it’s easier to throw a woman under the bus than a culture.

The message is clear: boys matter more than girls, and what boys do to girls doesn't matter.

What would women’s lives be like, what would our roles and accomplishments be, what would our world be, without this terrible punishment that looms over out daily lives?
Who would we be if our epics and myths, our directors and media moguls, our presidents, congressmen, chief executive officers, billionaires were not so often white and male? 

