WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- THE PROBLEM WITH SEX IS CAPITALISM

Incel: short for involuntary celibate

Maybe the problem with sex is capitalism.
Sex is a commodity; accumulation of this commodity enhances a man’s status; and every man has a right to accumulation, but women present obstacles to accumulation and are therefore the enemy as well as the commodity. Incels want high-status women, are furious at their own low status, but don’t question the system that allocates status and commodifies us all in ways that are painful and dehumanizing.

If you don’t think you’re entitled to sex, you might feel sad or lonely or blue about not getting what you want. You wouldn’t feel enraged at anyone unless you thought those anyones owed you.

    We are all impacted by the idea that everyone has a market value.

Women-as-bodies are sex waiting to happen (to men) and women-as-people are annoying gatekeepers getting between men and female bodies, which is why there’s a ton of advice about how to trick or overwhelm the gatekeeper.
Seduction is often a euphemism for siege warfare.

Feminism and capitalism are at odds, if under the one women are people and under the other they are property.
Sex is a transaction; men’s status is enhanced by racking up transactions, as though they were poker chips.

As a commodity you must be desirable, but the results of that desirability—erotic contact—can be regarded as making you used, contaminated, impure, due for punishment. If men acquire in a sexual transaction, women apparently lose. Both being sexual and not being sexual are prone to punishment, and the ideal woman is supposed to be both, neither, and something impossible in between. And often the sex she has is measured not by whether she enjoyed it but whether her partner did; when you’re the commodity, you’re not the consumer.

Under capitalism, sex might as well be with dead objects, not live collaborators. It is not imagined as something two people do that might be affectionate and playful and collaborative but as something that one person gets. The other person is sometimes hardly recognized as a person, and often her personhood has to get out of the way for this version to be enacted. It’s a lonely version of sex. 


