WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- ALL THE RAGE

Male anger is a public safety issue, as well as a force in the ugliest politics and social movements of our time, from the epidemic of domestic violence to mass shootings, and from neo-Nazis to incels.

We have until very recently treated it as inevitable that women should adapt to these outbursts with mace in our purses, self-defense lessons, and limits on our freedom of movement, tiptoeing around men who use their volatility to intimidate and control others.

Women no longer obliged to please men may finally be able to express rage, because we’re less economically dependent on men than ever before and because feminism has been redefining what’s appropriate and acceptable to express.

Verbal rage and phyical violence are weaknesses. Equanimity is one of the key Buddhist virtues, and anger is considered a poison in many Buddhist philosophies. It too often hardens into hate or boils up into violence. Angry people are miserable. Easily angered people are easily manipulated.

When a woman shows anger, Chemaly observes, “she automatically violates gender norms. She is met with aversion, perceived as more hostile, irritable, less competent, and unlikeable.” But even if, for example, she says quite calmly that gender violence is epidemic, she can still be attacked and characterized as angry, and that anger can be used as a way to discount the evidence in a society that often still expects that women be pleasing and compliant.

As little girls we are conditioned to believe that cruelty and love somehow have a connection and that is like the sort of era that we need to evolve out of.” That is, women are conditioned to accept abuse, and to accept it as its opposite (and to keep letting boys knock down their towers). The power to define your own experience is one of the powers that matters most.

Letting off steam: an industrial-era metaphor that casts human beings as engines in which pressure builds up and must be released

Anger itself is a catchall term for a lot of overlapping but distinct phenomena. Among them are outrage, indignation, and distress, which are commonly born of empathy for the victims rather than animosity toward the victimizers. These feelings, which may last a lifetime, may not include the temporary physiological reaction that is bodily anger, with rising blood pressure and quickened pulse, tension and often a surge of energy. That reaction is, in the moment, a preparation to respond to danger.

