WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- IF I WERE A MAN

“Men are more than just success objects.” Perhaps, as a girl, I was liberated by expectations that I’d be some variation on a failure. I could rebel by succeeding, while a lot of white middle-class men of my era seemed to rebel by failing, because the expectations had been set so very high for them. But success was available to them, and that was an advantage (and still is).

Boys can be stigmatized as nerds and geeks, but they can’t really be too smart. Girls can, and a lot of girls learn to hide their intelligence, or just abandon or devalue or doubt it. Having strong opinions and clear ideas is incompatible with being flatteringly deferential.

What is regarded as confidence in a man is too often viewed as competitiveness in a woman; what is leadership in a man is bossiness in a woman.

Success can contain implicit failure for straight women, who are supposed to succeed as women by making men feel godlike in their might.

It’s as though everything fathers do, economics aside, is bonus; nothing mothers do is never enough.

The phrases sometimes used for men who partner with successful women— taking it in his stride, not put out by, okay with, dealing with, cool with —are reminders that female success can be regarded as some kind of burden, intrusion, or inappropriate behavior.

Success sometimes seems like that for women, an awkwardly large thing that is assumed to be in other people’s way and for which you might need to apologize periodically.

Women may aspire to be men just to be free from persecution by them, and many women have. There are many stories of people cross-dressing not as self-expression but for practical purposes, just as there are of people of color passing as white.

Not a little of the stuff women wore, and still wear, is an impediment and a confinement. What is it like to spend a lot of your life in shoes in which you’re less steady and swift than the people around you? These garments can be fun and glamorous, but as an everyday uniform they’re often incapacitating.

