WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- CROSSING OVER

Metaphors are not how we define territories but how we travel across thresholds between categories. They are bridges across categories and differences. Through them we connect the abstract and the concrete, the small and the large, the live and inanimate, the human and the nonhuman.
We think through our bodies, and that includes seeing bodies elsewhere, making bodies the terms of understanding how animate and inanimate, tiny and huge objects and systems work. Both needles and storms have eyes. 
Metaphor is the process of relating things that are alike in some fashion, to some degree, and the literal-minded object on the grounds that there are also differences, while the metaphorically minded understand the limits of similarity.

Bodies are real, while nations are in some sense fictions of separateness, made by drawing fictitious lines on continents (and a few islands, notably the Dominican Republic and Haiti), and then pretending that these are demarcations of true separateness and independence.

Under patriarchy the ideal body has been imagined as an isolationist nation, an island unto itself, in total control, which makes the female body—or any body whose orifices and interchanges, whose penetrability and vulnerability, are acknowledged—troublesome.
It’s sexual penetration and penetrability and ideas of openness as erotic and social possibilities that seem to be the source of animosity and anxiety for the men who imagine themselves as islands or fortresses or island fortresses. 
Patrilineality—the descent of the male line—has also begotten a fury to control women’s sexuality, and that fury has for millennia begotten clothing, laws, customs, punishments, architectures, and rules to regulate women’s bodies in order to preserve male powers and lineages.

The idea of illegal immigrants arises from the idea of the nation as a body whose purity is defiled by foreign bodies, and of its borders as something that can and should be sealed. There is a dream of a nation that is autonomous, uncontaminated, a sort of solid block of impenetrable matter, a dream that defies the reality of circulating air, water, goods, migratory animals, and histories in which other borders or no borders existed, in which most of us crossed many borders to arrive here. It’s a fantasy of safety, in which self and other are distinct and the other can be successfully repelled, one that begs and refuses the questions of who us is and who they are.

Isolation pretends that parts of the whole are instead autonomous islands, and of course islands themselves are often not isolated at all: they are trading centers, nesting sites for migratory birds, places of coming and going. 

