WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- CITY OF WOMEN

Walking down the city streets, young women get harassed in ways that tell them that this is not their world, their city, their street; that their freedom of movement and association is liable to be undermined at any time; and that a lot of strangers expect obedience and attention from them. “Smile,” a man orders you, and that’s a concise way to say that he owns you; he’s the boss; you do as you’re told; your face is there to serve his life, not express your own. He’s someone; you’re no one.

Almost every city is full of men’s names, names that are markers of who wielded power, who made history, who held fortunes, who was remembered; women are anonymous people who changed fathers’ for husbands’ names as they married, who lived in private and were comparatively forgotten, with few exceptions.

A horde of dead men with live identities haunts New York City and almost every city in the Western world. Their names are on the streets, the buildings, the parks, squares, colleges, businesses, and banks, and they are the figures on the monuments.

Statues of women are not uncommon, but they're allegories and nobodies, mothers and muses and props but not presidents.

When I watch action movies with female protagonists—from Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon to The Hunger Games , I come out feeling charged-up, superhuman, indomitable. It’s like a drug for potency and confidence. Lately I’ve come to wonder what it would feel like if, instead of seeing a dozen or so such films in my lifetime, I had the option at any moment of seeing several new releases lionizing my gender’s superpowers, if lady Bonds and Spiderwomen became the ordinary fare of my entertainment and imagination, or always had been. 

I can’t imagine how I might have conceived of myself and my possibilities if, in my formative years, I had moved through a city where most things were named after women and many or most of the monuments were of powerful, successful, honored women.
