WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- LONG DISTANCE

The present is, by common definition, the instant between the not yet and the already, a moment as narrow and treacherous as a tightrope. But you might instead define it as all that is remembered by those who are currently alive. A version of the now ends when living memory gives way to secondhand memory or recorded history—when the last veteran of a war dies, or a language loses its last fluent speakers. As long as such witnesses are on hand, the now is something bigger than it seems.

Listening in 2015 to a woman born in 1916 praise a woman born in 1814, I felt acutely the long reach of the present. It seemed, sitting there, that the city we both inhabited was a place full of overlapping gestures, of people looking backward and passing something forward, of the coherence of a storied landscape.

There have been many versions of the past as a golden age, attainable only through some brutalization of a minority population, some reassertion of old hierarchies. 
Such ugly sentimentality may make a case against reaching to the past. But it is equally an argument for a present in which people are not so bereft of recent histories that they will accept fictions and oversimplifications of the past. It’s an argument for more history, not less.

BASELINE: it's the stable point from which you measure change in a system before it was damaged or dramatically altered (the total population of a given species before it became endangered, for example).
If history and intergenerational memory give us social and political baselines, amnesia renders us vulnerable to experiencing the present as inevitable, unchangeable, or just inexplicable. There is power and possibility in remembering that booms don’t last, that the ways in which we think about race, gender, childhood, and age are mutable, that anyone who has lived for more than a few years has lived through violent transformations.

I am old enough now to be a repository of the way things were before: I know what it was like before cell phones, before home computers (not to mention the internet), before AIDS, before effective treatment of AIDS, before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, before a series of victories for feminism changed women’s lives, including mine. The sheer differentness of the past, the reminder that everything changes, has always felt liberatory to me; to know that this moment will pass is freeing. There have been, there will be, other ways to be human. But the loss that is not gradual evolution but eviction and erasure is not liberatory at all.

