WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- MONUMENTAL CHANGE AND THE POWER OF NAMES

Statues and names are not in themselves human rights or equal access or a substitute for them. But they are crucial parts of the built environment, ones that tell us who matters and who will be remembered. They furnish our imaginations and shape the sense of the past that we call on to determine what future to choose and whom to value and listen to in the present. That this is all changing signifies several things. Who is meant by “we” is crucial to any place, and a monument that celebrates pioneers or Indian killers—as so many across the West do—classifies Native people as outsiders and enemies. A place that only honors men defines women as nobodies. Colonizers often begin by renaming the places they’ve arrived in, and decolonization always involves undoing this; victors erect statues to themselves and their version of history. 

When you look at white men enraged and indignant at having to share the stage with others, you see the consequences of their formation in a world centered on white men. It’s bad for them, too. You can see what’s going on in public squares and street names as a rough equivalent to #MeToo and #BlackLivesMatter: a shift in whose voice is heard and whose life valued.

That this was a white Protestant nation was a given when I was growing up. But both the whiteness and the religiosity are in decline. 

Because even if the percentage of white evangelicals weren’t shrinking, the nonwhite population is growing and will be a majority population nationwide in little over a quarter century, as it already is in California. You can see in these name changes and shifts in who and what is commemorated in public places a series of small victories for a more inclusive, egalitarian vision, even in the shadow of the Trump regime.

Seeing this extraordinary transformation of the public landscape is seeing that the very ground we stand on, the streets we travel on, and the people we honor are changing. We are laying the foundation for a different place, for a different society, and despite the regressive raging in the centers of power, this widespread process shows no sign of stopping.

