THE POWER TO TELL STORIES IS THE POWER TO DICTATE REALITY

One of the battles of our time is about who the story is about, who matters, and who decides.

One way we know whose story it is has been demonstrated by who gets excused for hatred and attacks, literal or physical. And that has been white people in general and white men in particular, and especially straight white Protestant men.

Women are required to meet the needs of boys and men who may be hostile or homicidal. This framework suggests we owe them something, which feeds a sense of entitlement, which sets up the logic of payback for not delivering what they think we owe them.

A right to impunity: a right to do what you like and dictate the reality around it, a right to confront no competing versions, even from the other parties involved.

A change in who is audible is a change in who is somebody.

We see that the men who have had the power to abuse women's bodies and psyches throughout their careers are in many cases also the ones in charge of our political and cultural stories.

Patriarchy kills off stories and women to maintain its power. If you’re a woman, this stuff shapes you; it tells you that you are worthless, no one, voiceless, that this is not a world in which you are safe or equal or free. That your life is something someone else may steal from you, even a complete stranger, just because you’re a woman. This society that is itself a system of punishment for being a woman.

STORIES IN PUBLIC PLACES

A horde of dead men with live identities haunts almost every city in the Western world. Their names are on the streets, the buildings, the parks, squares, colleges, businesses, and banks, and they are the figures on the monuments.

Statues of women are not uncommon, but they're allegories and nobodies, mothers and muses and props but not presidents.

Statues and names are not in themselves human rights or equal access or a substitute for them. But they are crucial parts of the built environment, ones that tell us who matters and who will be remembered. They furnish our imaginations and shape the sense of the past.

A place that only honors men defines women as nobodies. 

SEX AND CAPITALISM

Sex is a commodity; accumulation of this commodity enhances a man’s status; and every man has a right to accumulation, but women present obstacles to accumulation and are therefore the enemy as well as the commodity. 

If you don’t think you’re entitled to sex, you might feel sad or lonely or blue about not getting what you want. You wouldn’t feel enraged at anyone unless you thought those anyones owed you.

Women-as-bodies are sex waiting to happen (to men) and women-as-people are annoying gatekeepers getting between men and female bodies, which is why there’s a ton of advice about how to trick or overwhelm the gatekeeper.

As a commodity you must be desirable, but the results of that desirability (erotic contact) can be regarded as making you used, contaminated, impure, due for punishment. If men acquire in a sexual transaction, women apparently lose. Both being sexual and not being sexual are prone to punishment, and the ideal woman is supposed to be both, neither, and something impossible in between. And often the sex she has is measured not by whether she enjoyed it but whether her partner did; when you’re the commodity, you’re not the consumer.

A HEROIC LONER VERSUS STRENGTH IN NUMBERS

Lone hero narratives push one figure into the public eye, but they push everyone else back into private life, or at least passive life.

And maybe we as a society are getting tired of heroes, and a lot of us are certainly getting tired of overconfident white men. Even the idea that the solution will be singular and dramatic and in the hands of one person erases that the solutions to problems are often complex and many-faceted and arrived at via negotiations.

We're not very good at telling stories about hundreds of people changing the world through their ability to coordinate and inspire and connect with lots of other people.

We like our lone and exceptional heroes, the drama of violence and virtue of muscle, or at least that’s what we get, over and over, and from it we don’t get much of a picture of how change actually happens and what our role in it might be, or how ordinary people matter. 

That’s another part of our rugged individualism and hero culture, the idea that all problems are personal and they’re all soluble by personal responsibility. It’s a framework that eliminates the possibility of deeper, broader change or of holding accountable the powerful who create and benefit from the status quo and its myriad forms of harm. 

Our largest problems won’t be solved by heroes. They’ll be solved, by movements, coalitions, civil society.
