WHOSE STORY IS THIS?
Rebecca Solnit

- KEYPOINTS

THE POWER TO TELL STORIES IS THE POWER TO DICTATE REALITY

One of the battles of our time is about who the story is about, who matters, and who decides.

One way we know whose story it is has been demonstrated by who gets excused for hatred and attacks, literal or physical. And that has been white people in general and white men in particular, and especially straight white Protestant men. It's the population we're constantly asked to pay more attention to, and forgive, even when they hate us or seek to harm us.

We are required to meet the needs of boys and men who may be hostile or homicidal. This framework suggests we owe them something, which feeds a sense of entitlement, which sets up the logic of payback for not delivering what they think we owe them.

Abuse, denigration, and assault had long been regarded as officially unacceptable but permissible as long as the public didn't know that those in charge had been aware. A change in who is audible is a change in who is somebody.

There are among us people who assume their authority is so great they can dictate what happened: that their assertions will override witnesses, videotapes, evidence and historical record. That theirs is the only voice that matters.

A right to impunity: a right to do what you like and dictate the reality around it, a right to confront no competing versions, even from the other parties involved.

Perhaps rather than power, we should talk about powers, the ones we can generate ourselves and the ones that people give to us or withold from us. The power of being believed is distributed as unequally as any out there.

There's an old habit of mysogynist men of asserting that women are not to be believed, but men are. There is a long, brutal tradition of asserting that men are credible but women are not. Men are objective, women are subjective. 

We officially condemn rape and molestation, harassment and abuse, but too many within that "we" have also often insisted that those things didn't happen when they did, and this denial is part of the fiction that men are objective, women are subjective, so subjective we must find them crazy, delusional, or maybe drunk at the time and prone to mistaken identity.

We see that the men who have had the power to abuse women's bodies and psyches throughout their careers are in many cases also the ones in charge of our political and cultural stories.

One of the rights that the powerful often assume is the power to dictate reality. 

Patriarchy kills off stories and women to maintain its power. If you’re a woman, this stuff shapes you; it scars you, it tells you that you are worthless, no one, voiceless, that this is not a world in which you are safe or equal or free. That your life is something someone else may steal from you, even a complete stranger, just because you’re a woman. This society that is itself a system of punishment for being a woman.

Who would we be if our epics and myths, our directors and media moguls, our presidents, congressmen, chief executive officers, billionaires were not so often white and male?

A horde of dead men with live identities haunts New York City and almost every city in the Western world. Their names are on the streets, the buildings, the parks, squares, colleges, businesses, and banks, and they are the figures on the monuments.

Statues of women are not uncommon, but they're allegories and nobodies, mothers and muses and props but not presidents.

Statues and names are not in themselves human rights or equal access or a substitute for them. But they are crucial parts of the built environment, ones that tell us who matters and who will be remembered. They furnish our imaginations and shape the sense of the past.

A place that only honors men defines women as nobodies. Colonizers often begin by renaming the places they’ve arrived in, and decolonization always involves undoing this; victors erect statues to themselves and their version of history.

SEX AND CAPITALISM

Sex is a commodity; accumulation of this commodity enhances a man’s status; and every man has a right to accumulation, but women present obstacles to accumulation and are therefore the enemy as well as the commodity. 

If you don’t think you’re entitled to sex, you might feel sad or lonely or blue about not getting what you want. You wouldn’t feel enraged at anyone unless you thought those anyones owed you.

Women-as-bodies are sex waiting to happen (to men) and women-as-people are annoying gatekeepers getting between men and female bodies, which is why there’s a ton of advice about how to trick or overwhelm the gatekeeper.

As a commodity you must be desirable, but the results of that desirability—erotic contact—can be regarded as making you used, contaminated, impure, due for punishment. If men acquire in a sexual transaction, women apparently lose. Both being sexual and not being sexual are prone to punishment, and the ideal woman is supposed to be both, neither, and something impossible in between. And often the sex she has is measured not by whether she enjoyed it but whether her partner did; when you’re the commodity, you’re not the consumer.

A HEROIC LONER VERSUS STRENGTH IN NUMBERS

We are not very good at telling stories about a hundred people doing things or considering that the qualities that matter in changing the world are mostly not physical courage and athletic violence but the ability to coordinate and inspire and connect with lots of other people and create stories about what could be and how we get there.

But we like our lone and exceptional heroes, the drama of violence and virtue of muscle, or at least that’s what we get, over and over, and from it we don’t get much of a picture of how change actually happens and what our role in it might be, or how ordinary people matter. 

Lone hero narratives push one figure into the public eye, but they push everyone else back into private life, or at least passive life.

And maybe we as a society are getting tired of heroes, and a lot of us are certainly getting tired of overconfident white men. Even the idea that the solution will be singular and dramatic and in the hands of one person erases that the solutions to problems are often complex and many-faceted and arrived at via negotiations.

That’s another part of our rugged individualism and hero culture, the idea that all problems are personal and they’re all soluble by personal responsibility. It’s a framework that eliminates the possibility of deeper, broader change or of holding accountable the powerful who create and benefit from the status quo and its myriad forms of harm. 

Our largest problems won’t be solved by heroes. They’ll be solved, if they are, by movements, coalitions, civil society.

Patriarchal authority itself is shown as the solution to disasters, or as a sort of drug to make us feel secure despite them.

