THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Peter Ward

CHAPTER 5: MEDEAN EVENTS IN THE HISTORY OF LIFE

Mass extinctions were short-term events reducing the diversity of life on Earth, and to kill off species requires the wholesale death of many individuals making up those species. In a mass extinction, there are so many species extinctions taht the number of individuals of all kinds of life must be significantly diminished. Mass extinctions play no part in the Gaia hypothesis. 

Medean events: life-driven episodes that result in a drop in diversity of abundance of subsequent (later generation) life. Extinction events. 

- DNA TAKEOVER - 4.0 TO 3.7 BILLION YEARS AGO

It's possible that early DNA life on Earth might have come in a variety of forms, perhaps all slightly different from our now familiar DNA. If so, it's possible that separate kinds of DNA competed against each other. The suppression of other kinds of life would have followed, and if so, this would have been a Medean event, the first example of a Medean event: the takeover of the single kind of life. 

- THE METHANE DISASTER - 3.7 MILLION YEARS AGO

Titan has a peculiar atmosphere, currently unique in our Solar System, but one that any early Earth-like planets might necessarily have: a thick atmosphere of methane smog. The methane atmosphere hypothesized to have been present on the early Earth may have been a byproduct of the first life, a waste product of its earliest metabolism. Life was present on Earth as a series of stacked bacterial layers and sediment, called stromatolites. These microbes became globally abundant and in doing so changed the planet, poisoning it.

The formation of the methane haze took an already cold world (the Sun was more than 30% less energetic) and added a layer of clouds for the first time that reflected heat back into space. Had the Earth been even slightly farther out in space, the planet would have reached a temperature too cold for any kind of current Earth life. 

This is the first test that shows how earliest life nearly ended its own history through its formation. 

- THE FIRST RISE OF ATMOSPHERIC OXYGEN - 2.5 BILLION YEARS AGO

The current idea about the origin of our oxygen atmosphere is that small amounts began to appear from the brand new photosynthetic microbes about 3 billion years ago. Until that time all life had been anaerobic, using primitive types of photosynthesis that didn't release oxygen. The evolution of oxygen-releasing photosynthesis led to the accumulation of free oxygen.

Oxygen caused a massive extinction of planet Earth. This is a Medean result. Only the children of the bugs that could tolerate oxygen would survive. 

- THE FIRST GLOBAL GLACIATION - 2.3 BILLION YEARS AGO

The hypothesis of Snowball Earth states that the first global Ice Age (about 2.3 billion years ago) was so severe that the Earth's oceans froze and in doing so nearly extinguished life on Earth. Only heat from the planetary core allowed some liquid water to exist under ice more than a kilometer thick. 

The same photosynthetic microbes described before increased in number to the point that they removed most greenhouse gases. This added to the Sun and its energy output on Earth was notably weaker at the time, temperatures plunged. The planetary thermostat broke down. The polar ice caps expanded, covering a large part of the surface with glaciers. Global cooling accelerated because ice, being white, reflects heat back into space much more efficiently than darker colors. 

- THE CANFIELD OCEANS - 2.1 BILLION YEARS AGO

We had life 3.7 billion years ago but true animals didn't appear until 0.6 billion years ago. Even multicellular plants weren't present in abundance until 1 billion years ago. Why so long? The evolution of complexity was stifled by life itself, in the form of Canfield oceans. This was Medean. 

Over long periods of time the anoxic oceans were of two kinds: one without oxygen and the other was filled with poison, the nasty gas known as hydrogen sulfide. This highly toxic gas is a lethal poison. Even dissolved in seawater, it becomes so lethal to sea life. And if it makes it to the atmosphere in sufficient amount, it can be a threat to terrestial life. 

There is a particular type of bacteria that gives hydrogen sulfide as a waste product. They seem to have bloomed into toxic abundance over much of Precambrian time. So toxic were the Canfield oceans that they may have inhibited life's first evolution for millions of years during Precambiran times (600 millions years ago to the time of life's origin). 

Interestingly enough, a Canfield ocean has turned up at several times in the deep past that coincide with catastrophic mass extinctions. 

- A SECOND SNOW BALL - 700 MILLION YEARS AGO

After the first snowball, life underwent little further evolution toward complexity. About 700 million years ago, new kinds of plants finally diversified, and the Earth entered a new Snowball Earth episode. This new snowball drastically affected the pathways of nutrient cycling and it may have delayed the rise of land life by 100 million years. Like the first snowball, this event was also caused by life, it's also a Medean event.

- THE RISE OF ANIMALES, THE REDUCTION OF LIFE - 600 MILLION YEARS AGO

This event seems to signal the end of the long periods of Canfield oceans, the highly toxic, low oxygen, high hydrogen sulfide ocean bottoms. The rise of animals occurred during the 540 to 500 million year old Cambrian Explosion which is deemed one of the great evolutionary events ever to have affected the planet. 

The following biomass reduction was probably caused by the herbivorous success of the newly evolved animals and a significant drop in global temperatures. If models are correct, it would have been the largest single drop in planetary temperature in Earth history, an estimate global surface drop of 40ºC.

- THE PHANEROZOIC MICROBIAL MASS EXTINCTIONS - 365 TO 95 MILLION YEARS AGO

Greenhouse mass extinctions: they are mass extinctions events caused by poisonous atmospheric state that could return if  CO2 levels reach or exceed 1.000ppm. 

We know that 251 million years ago, CO2 levels quickly shot up past 1.000ppm due to a gigantic volcanic event that flooded the atmosphere with volcanically produced  CO2. This produced the Permian extinction, when both ocean and atmosphere warmed over millennial scales to the point that crocodiles and palms existed in the Artic Circle. More importantly, the heat differential between tropics and the Artic and Antartic narrowed to the point that wind and ocean currents stopped. 

As the great current engines slowed and the stopped, normal oceanic mechanisms carrying cold, oxygenated seawater from the surface into the deep sea stopped as well. The deep sea warmed and went anoxic, killing all animals in a planet-spanning anoxic zone. The oceans changed states, and soon the atmosphere did too. 

This happened at least 8 times that we know of.

- RAPID GLOBAL TEMPERATURE CHANGES DUE TO COLONIZATION OF LAND BY PLANTS - 400 TO 250 MILLION YEARS AGO

The evolution of vascular plants had an effect of decreasing atmospheric CO2, and thus temperature rates. As plants die, they fall and become buried in sediment. Much of this material is decomposed, but there are parts that are resistant to microbial decomposition that forms coal deposits. This removes carbon from the atmosphere and leads to a dramatic decrese in atmospheric CO2.

The climatological implications of the evolution of land plants led to a twentyfold decrease in atmospheric CO2 over a 100 million period. A major consequence of this was a dramatic cooling of the Earth, and the creation of a major glaciation episode affecting large parts of the planet about 350 million years ago. Since then, the overall amount of inorganic carbon cycling through the system has been decreasing enough to cause a long-term temperature drop. 

- THE KT EXTINCTION - 65 MILLION YEARS AGO

By the end of the Cretaceous there were planet-spanning forests. Continent spanning forest fires produced an enormous amount of ash and dark carbon soot that filled the atmosphere. This soot, a product of life, caused global cooling for some months after the impact, which seems to have played a role in the KT mass extinction. There was also an asteroid impact during that time that contributed to the extinction process. 

