THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Peter Ward

CHAPTER 3: TWO HYPOTHESES ABOUT THE NATURE OF LIFE ON Earth

There are many religions on Earth, and Gaia worship in some form or another is ancient. It arose as a celebration, and fear, of nature. The recent ideas and discoveries of scientists are being co-opted back into a New Age form of Gaia worship.

The inclusion of evolution as a required element of life on Earth must lead to certain behaviors of that life. These include:
- Competition even within a species
- Sometimes cannibalism
- The behavior of breeding to a resource-defined "carrying capacity". Any given species of life seems to breed not only up to the point where all resources are spoken for, but beyond that point, so there are more individuals than resources. 

GAIA HYPOTHESIS

Gaia Hypothesis: life improves the planet for itself, and for future life. The idea that the biomass of Earth life self-regulates the conditions on the planet to make its physical environment (in particular temperature and chemistry of the atmosphere) most hospitable to the species that constitutes its life. 

    A stronger claim appeared early in the history of the Gaia hypothesis that considered all life-forms part of a single planetary being, called Gaia. Lovelock no longer subscribes to this theory. 

Currently, there are many distinct categories of the Gaia hypothesis:

1. Optimizing Gaia
"Through Gaia theory, I see the Earth and the life it bears as a system, a system that has the capacity to regulate the temperature and composition of the Earth's surface and keep it comfortable for living organisms." (James Lovelock, 1988)
Another interpretation of this hypothesis is that the biomass alters conditions on Earth to increase the "hospitality" of the planet. However, there is a degree of circularity in the argument that the Earth is ideally suited for life, because the life present on Earth has had a long time to adapt to the very conditions on Earth. 

2. Self-regulating Gaia
This theory supposes that feedback systems allow the continuation of life on Earth by keeping life-constraining factor such as temperature and atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide levels within ranges that allow life. 
It has been interpreted in two ways:
- Life tends to make the environment stable, allowing all life to flourish.
- Life tends to make the environment stable IN ORDER for all life to flourish. This is an important distinction that implies intent 

3. Coevolutionary Gaia
It states that the biota and environment have evolved in tandem. This is the "weakest" hypothesis that is already viewed as true.

4. Progressive, Deterministic Gaia
Once life evolved, there were only a few possible pathways for how life and its systems would evolve further. A small number of nutrient and element cycles that themselves affected later life. 

5. Garbage Can Gaia
The atmosphere is nothing but a giant waste dump. Life produces waste material in grate quantities, which build up and affect the environment and the organisms living in that environment. This was certainly the case when life began pouring oxygen into the atmosphere at a time when oxygen was poisonous to most life on Earth. 

6. Evolving Gaia
Proposed by Tim Lenton, this theory states that life didn't survive for over 3.8 billion years by chance, but rather because of the Earth system's regulatory mechanisms. The Earth system with life present is more resistant and resilient to many (but not all) perturbations, and the Earth is predicted to remain habitable for longer with life present than it would without.

THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Habitability of the Earth has been affected by the presence of life, but the overall effect of life has been and will be to reduce the longevity of the Earth as a habitable planet. Life itself, because it's inherently Darwinian, is biocidal, suicidal, and creates a series of positive feedbacks to Earth systems (like temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide) that harm later generations. 

- All species increase in population not only to the carrying capacity as defined by a number of limiting factors, but to levels beyond that capacity, causing a death rate higher than would otherwise have been dictated by limiting resources. 
There are always too many bugs for the amount of food, and soome number are always dying of starvation or being killed by other bugs as they fight for food. The population doesn't reach a stable number in peaceful coexistance. This is at the heart of Darwinian evolution: there are always more young than can be supported by resources, and "survival of the fittest" ensues. 
This property of Darwinian life is universal, humans are no exception.
- Life is self-poisoning in closed systems. The byproduct of species metabolism is usually toxic unless dispersed away. For example, animals produce carbon dioxide and liquid and solid waste, which if they accumulate in a close space can build up to lethal levels. 
- In ecosystems with more than a single species there will be competition for resources, ultimately leading to extinction or emigration of some of the original species. 

Under Gaian sense, these rather selfish biocidal and suicidal tendencies of populations somehow change at the scale of the biosphere. Individuals and populations are seen as bad, but together they all do "good". I would suggest that individuals are neutral, but life as an aggregate is negative to itself. 

    When the Earth is viewed not as a unique entity, but as one of surely many habitable planets, an entirely new kind of understanding arrives. The concept of "habitable planets" is based on planetary nurture, with life being the ultimate and hoped for result of planetary formation and change. 

(Los siguientes son subtitulos de The Medea Hypothesis)

SOLAR LIGHTING AND HEATING
Life requires energy. The Sun is the ultimate source of almost all of life's energy on Earth. Unfortunately, the Sun also has a dark side. The star we orbit is a time bomb, after nourishing life for billions of years, the Sun will evolve and cause what can be called "the end of Earth". 
The chain of nuclear reactions that take place in the Sun take 4 protons and turn them into 1 helium nucleus. As the number of particles gradually decreases, the temperature of the Sun's core rises. Ultimately, the nuclear "burning" process will move outward and the Sun will enter its red giant stage, where its surface will become cooler but its diameter will expand so much that its overall brightness will increase thousands of times. 
    
    For all its history, the Earth has been within the Habitable Zone (the "right" range of distance from the Sun where an Earth-like planet can have surface temperatures that allow oceans and animals to exist withoud freezing or frying). However, the Habitable Zone moves outward as the Sun becomes brighter, and in the future the zone will pass the Earth and leave it behind. The Earth will become like Venus!

PLANETARY THERMOSTAT
The planetary thermostat is a system that has kept the global average temperature of the Earth between the boiling and freezing points, allowing for the most important requirement for life (liquid water) to continually exist on the surface of the planet for an immense amount of time. 
This planetary thermostat is composed of 3 subsystems:
- Plate tectonics
- The carbon cycle
- The carbonate silicate cycle

Plate tectonics can be compared to the circulatory system of the planet. It's a process that produces the movements of landmasses (continental drift). This system not only carries material from place to place, it changes material as well. The upward and downward movement of Earth material buries some material and liberates other material. This causes chemical changes as well, through mineral formation, heating and the liberation of gases. 

THE CARBON CYCLE
If plate tectonics are the arterial system of the planet, the carbon cycle can be considered like an element that moves in circulation, like the blood. The carbon cycle is the main process for the regulation of long-term temperatures as well as atmospheric composition. The rapid exchange of carbon between inorganic compounds and organic compounds is crucial to life. It's also of great importance to the temperature of the Earth when it occurs as CO2 in the atmosphere. 

    Because of the disproportionate effect that tiny differences in carbon gas volumens have on global temperature, even small perturbations in the inflow and outflow of carbon with the atmosphere produce relatively large swings in average global temperature. 

Long-term climate is largely controlled by the silicate-carbonate geochemical cycle, an integral part of the carbon cycle. This cycle balances inorganic reactions taking place deep in the Earth with interactions between the atmosphere and the surface of the Earth. It's this balance that keeps atmospheric C02 levels essentially constant for the long timescale of geological time. 

Weathering is the chemical or physical breakdown of rocks and minerals. The weathering of the silicate rocks eventually remove C02 from the atmosphere.

    If the Gaia hypothesis is correct, the role of organisms in this cycle should keep temperatures stable and optimal for life. This has not been the case. Life has repeatedly interfered with the planetary thermostat in important and nearly disastrous ways. 

END OF THE LINE
For our own Earth, habitability will ultimately end for 2 reasons:
1. The first is not Medean: the ever-increasing energy output of our Sun will ultimately cause the loss of all Earth's oceans (sometime in the next 2 to 3 billion years). When oceans are lost to space, planetary temperatures will rise to unhabitable levels. But before that, 
2. The Earth will lose one fundamental resource for sustaining life: photosynthetic organisms. This will happen because of a reduction of C02 that will reach a point where it'll trigger a drop in atmospheric oxygen to a level too low to support animal life. This is a Medean effect. 

    It's because of life that the amount of C02 in the Earth's atmosphere has been steadily dropping in the last 200 million years. It's life that makes most calcium carbonate deposits (like coral skeletons) that cause a drop in C02 since it takes C02 from the atmosphere to build this type of skeleton. Life will continue to do this until a lethal lower limit is attained. 

