THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Peter Ward

CHAPTER 7: BIOMASS THROUGH TIME AS A TEST

John Phillips (who published his monumental work in 1860) recognized that major mass extinctions in the past could be used to subdivide geological time, since the aftermath of each such event resulted in the appearance of a new fauna as recognized in the fossil record. He proposed that diversity in the past was far lower than in the modern day, and that the rise of biodiversity has been one of the wholesale increases in the number of species, except during and inmmediately after the mass extinctions.

The argument as to whether diversity has shown a rapid increase through time, or whether it achieved a high level early on and has stayed approximately steady ever since dominated paleontological research for much of the later part of the 20th century. 

More recent studies of the net view of biodiversity over the last 500 million years found the same thing as John Phillips did in 1860: there are more species on the planet than at any time in the past. Even more comforting, the trajectory of biodiversity seemed to show that the engine of diversification (the processes producing new species) was in high gear, suggesting that in the future the planet would continue to have ever more species. This long-held scientific belief suggested to many that we are in the best of biological times (at least in terms of global biodiversity), and that there is every reason to believe that even more diverse and productive world still lies ahead. 

Analyses of the Marshall-Alroy group found that diversity in the Paleozoic was about the same as in the mid-Cenozoic. The implications of this is that we may have reached a steady state of diversity hundred of millions of years ago. Perhaps our planet, rather than still growing in biodiversity totals, has already peaked and is sliding back into lesser numbers. 

PLANETARY BIOMASS

Biomass and productivity are 2 ways of meassuring the amount of life on the planet:
- Biomass is the total weight of living material
- Productivity is the rate at which inorganic carbon is tranformed into organic carbon

The biomass on the planet should be related to several factors, any one of which can be limiting: energy, nutrients and temperature. 

-   Energy 
    Energy ultimately comes from the Sun. Since the formation of Earth, the Sun has increased energy output by about a third. We would suspect that in a perfect world, where neither temperature nor nutrients are limiting, the biomass of the Earth should roughly increase through time. But we're not in a perfect world, and this is where Darwinian evolution comes in. The first life was surely less efficient at extracting energy than life today. 
    Assumming that life would increase to the point that it would use all resources (one of the properties of Darwinian life), the successive increase in energy acquisition through evolving metabolic pathways should yield ever-higher planetary biomass.

-   Nutrients   
    We animals ultimately derive our energy from plants. Whether it's by eating other animals that have eaten plants, or by eating plants themselves, we are ultimately plan carnivores. But what of plants themselves? They also need 3 elements that can be limiting: carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. 
    Their carbon comes from the atmosphere, in the form of carbon dioxide. Of the 3 elements, carbon holds the fate of life on Earth, and the most important variable in the "carbon cycle" is carbon dioxide. And what we observe regarding carbon dioxide is a long-term decrease of it. 

-   Temperature 
    Since life needs liquid water to exists, the temperature range needed to suport life on Earth is from 20-70ºC. In the distant past, we may have had an Earth as hot as 25º and as cold as 5º. Neither of these extremes would have imperiled the continued existence of animals and plants on the planet. 
    These estimates apply to about 10% of Earth history. For the 90% there are no records, we work from inferences. It's estimated that the planet had global temperatures above 70ºC at 3 billion years ago, 60ºC at 2 billion years ago and about 40ºC 1 billion years ago. 

We can estimate that biomass would have been higher when the world was warmer, simply because we see such a high biomass in the tropical ocean and land areas. In such a case, it's easy to envision a world of higher biomass in the early Paleozoic, and perhaps right up until the major cooling trend of the Cenozoic, which caused global temperatures to tumble in the Miocene. 