THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Peter Ward

CHAPTER 4: MEDEAN FEEDBACKS AND GLOBAL PROCESSES

One of the fundamental findings of Earth system science has been the discovery of numerous "feedback" systems, where a given environmental change cycles through several systems and ultimately produces further change.  The Gaia hypothesis proposes that biological feedbacks should be dominantly "negative". For example, a negative biological feedback for planetary temperature would mean that rising temperatures would eventually cause the feedback system to bring about a subsequent lowering of temperatures. 

The Medea hypothesis proposes the opposite: that biological feedback systems affecting the survivability of life are overwhelmingly positive. 

According to the work of Lashof, it seems as if organisms are actually amplifying the effects of global warming through an increase of atmospheric C02. Atmospheric C02 has been rising consistently during the past 2 centuries. 

    One would predict that biological processes should tighthly regulate the composition of the atmosphere and therefore keep it relatively stable. This is not true. Both long-term and shorter-term changes in the levels of these biologically important gases show that the atmosphere can change quickly under certain conditions (like when there are ice caps on Earth).
    The failure of the Earth system to tightly regulate atmospheric C02 (at least on human timescales) is another empirical refutation of the Gaia hypothesis. 

As land plants began to cover the planet with the first sparse twiggy forms, soon evolving into higher shrubs and eventually reaching into the sky as the tallest of trees, enormous changes affected the planet. Giant quantities of carbon began to be locked up into the land within rotting vegetation, and eventually coal and oil. Soils became deeper and richer. And as the green spread, the fine balance between the amount of carbon held in the atmosphere and that held in the soils, oceans, and rocks of the planet began to change. Carbon dioxide levels began to drop  as more and more plants sucked it from the atmosphere, and as plants began to increase the weathering rates of silicate rocks, allowing more limestone to form. 

Another aspect of C02 and oxygen relates to mass extinctions. Specific mass extinctions appear to have been coincident with times of either low oxygen or increasing C02. 
