THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Peter Ward

CHAPTER 6: HUMANS AS MEDEANS

The most fundamental division in Earth life is between the prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 

- Prokaryotes are bacteria and microbes
- Eukaryotes are larger than prokaryotes and differ from them because they contain their genetic material in an enclosed nucleus within the cell itself. It's the eukaryotes that best evolved into multicellular organisms

When confronted by environmental challanges that are lethal, prokaryotes respond by trying to change their environment, as well as themselves. Eukaryotes respond to these challanges by changing their morphologies. 

In terms of major environmental changes affecting the planet, the prokaryotes win hands down. It was microbes that changed the early Earth atmosphere from one of nitrogen and carbon dioxide to an enriched methane atmosphere, and then changed it again to one that was oxygen-rich. In contrast, eukaryotes have had a less marked effect on the planet. The most important of these effects were produced by plants, that affect the silicon-carbonate thermostat of the Earth. 

    For the first time, one species of eukaryotes has begun to act more like microbes: us.
    When we are cold, we don't make the world warmer, as microbes would: we put on clothes. When dealing with heat we use air conditioning, causing the actual temperature to drop around us.

Many are considering colonies on Mars and how to "terraform" that planet to eventually allow humans to live there. This is very prokaryotic. 

The vast array of toxic waste produced by humanity (from too much carbon dioxide to too much plutonium waste) is unprecedented even by most microbial actions of the past. 

HUMAN-INDUCED BIOMASS REDUCTION

Forest have been a part of this planet for more than 300 million years and the nature of the forests has changed little. Humanity, over the brief period of history that we have been on this planet, has treated forests as if they were infinite.

The forests are the great arks of species on this planet. 80 to 90% of the total biodiversity of the planet is found on land, most in tropical forest. As we destroy these forests, we destroy species. Much of the industrialization has been at the expense of the forests. Forest conversion (changing forest first to fields then usually to eroded, infertile land within a generation) is perhaps the most direct cause of biodiveristy loss. 

    We humans are reducing planetary biomass in ways completely consistent with the Medea hypothesis, and in ways inconsistent with the Gaia hypothesis. 

