THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Peter Ward

INTRODUCTION

The extinction on land thus beget its own, different kind of misery in the sea. Thus we have no need to wage our evil magic wand over the seas; simply killing off the land forests, or a good portion of them anyway, does the trick.

What is the monetary value of a species going extinct?

Global cooling events have been triggered in the past by deadly murderers. And cold is only one of their weapons. If the global assassins wanted to kill off an even larger percentage of life on Earth than is possible with glacial cold, the weapon of mass destruction of choice would be heat, what we now call "global warming". By just raising the temperature of the planet a few more degrees than it is now, we could reduce Earth-life's diversity and biomass to extremely low levels-or even cause planetary sterility through mass extinction.
But the reality is that there IS a killer on the loose capable of planetary-scale catastrophe. It has killed in the deep and near past and is poised to kill again in the distant future. It hides in plain sight.
The killer is life itself. If left unchecked, it will hasten the ultimate death of all life on Earth. Only human intelligence and engineering can delay this fate. 

Right now we are rapidly transforming a world of moderate temperature (one with ice caps and relatively low sea level) to a heated world without ice caps and with high sea level. While we are the only organisms capable of extending the life of the biosphere, we're not hte only creatures capable of reducing the lifespan of the Earth as a habitable world. The mass extinctions of the past were far more lethal than any war yet waged by humans, and they were not even primarily caused by complex life. Rather, microbs were at the root. 

    Our planet is a jet plane in the hands of a madman bent on spectacular immolation of self-destruction. 

How and why did Mother Nature get so vicious. The answer seems to be that an innate lethality is a side effect of the main factor leading to life itself: evolution. A complex of forces that first brought life into existence and then shaped it, divided it, and spread it throughout the biosphere. 
A characteristic of evolution is that its basic unit is the species, not the biosphere, and from this grows a vicious, uncaring lethality toward other species that is one of the three most basic characteristics of life itself.

We now know that Earth life has always had a major effect on the nonliving parts of the Earth where life lives, and that we expect it always will. Beyond the nonliving, life has profound effects on itself. Life affects life. Life also affects death, even the ultimate death, the end of living organisms on Earth. 

THE GAIA HYPOTHESIS

- It's actually composed of at least 2 separate hypothesis: "Self-Regulating Gaia" and "Optimizing Gaia".
- Both support the hypothesis that Earth life in the past, present and future had had and will have the effect of maintaining planetary habitability by affecting the external environment in such a way as to keep it within specific limits dictated by various tolerances and requirements of life. 
- There's even a more extreme interpretation: that the Earth is an actual living entity, a consciousness, a living organism orbiting our Sun.

A large number of new discoveries about life of the past and new models about life in the future seem to falsify all of the Gaia hypothesis. 

    The name Gaia means "Good Mother", and the Greeks referred to her as Goddess of the Earth. The hypothesis of this book is that "Mother Nature" was, is, and will be anything but a good mother to her many evolved and evolving species. The "Medea Hypothesis" is proposed, named after one of the worst mothers ever, as an alternative to "Mother Nature".

This name seems more appropiate since Earth life has shown many past episodes in deep time and in current behavior to be inherently selfish and ultimately biocidal. Life will do this to itself by unconciously changing environmental conditions to a point where there can no longer be plant life or, ultimately, any kind of life. 

This inherent tendency comes from evolution, which is one of the main three things that define life on Earth (replication and metabolism being the other 2). Life can no more help evolving than we can stop breathing and stay alive. You evolve or you species goes extinct, for the Earth keeps changing. 

- Natural selection not only worked on better ways to get energy and withstand environmental difficulties but on better ways to evolve. 
- Life worked on perfecting energy acquisition, replicating quickly and with fidelity, and evolving ever more quickly. 
- The price to pay is that each and every species innately "tries" to become the dominant species on the planet, with no regard to other species. Be it bacteria or bees, all try to produce as many individuals as possible and in doing so poison the environment in various ways for all other species, including themselves.




