THE MEDEA HYPOTHESIS
Peter Ward

KEYPOINTS

A characteristic of evolution is that its basic unit is the species, not the biosphere, and from this grows a vicious, uncaring lethality toward other species. Earth life has shown many past episodes in deep time and in current behavior to be inherently selfish and ultimately biocidal. Life will do this to itself by unconciously changing environmental conditions to a point where there can no longer be plant life or, ultimately, any kind of life.

This inherent tendency comes from evolution, which is one of the main three things that define life on Earth (replication and metabolism being the other 2). Life can no more help evolving than we can stop breathing and stay alive. You evolve or you species goes extinct, for the Earth keeps changing. 

The price to pay is that each and every species innately "tries" to become the dominant species on the planet, with no regard to other species. Be it bacteria or bees, all try to produce as many individuals as possible and in, doing so, poison the environment in various ways for all other species, including themselves.

Basic concepts of Darwinian Evolution:

- All life on Earth came from a single common ancestor
- Life reproduces to produce slightly different versions of the parent. Most "parents" produce more offspring than can live because of shortages of food, shelter or other necessities. Because of this, some will die. Those that survived in the long run was because they had characteristics that made them in some way superior to others of their own species.

While some worry about the biodiversity point out how the Earth is losing species, the reality is that there is only one kind of life on Earth: our familiar DNA/RNA life. DNA is the information storage system of life itself, the "software" that runs all of Earth life's software.

Our Earth life uses carbon as the scaffolding element, but silicon could be used as well. All known Earth life is Darwinian.

The ideal individual would be immortal and would belong to a species that is extinction-proof, is widespread, has the highest relative and absolute biomass of the planet, and has the capability to either terraform our planet as it becomes "unterran" or migrate to a new planet. 

The greatest diversity should have existed in the Eocene, when the planet was a global jungle and had nearly global tropics. Models by a group at Potsdam show maximal biomass nearly a billion years ago, with a current downward trend.

Could it be that the production of ever more species actually reduces the biomass on a planet? Perhaps we have traded a world of a few, long-lived species for one with many, "more successful" species that produce many daughter species of themselves but at the same time have a very high extinction rate. This would be a very Medean relationship. 

GAIA HYPOTHESIS

Gaia Hypothesis: life improves the planet for itself, and for future life. The idea that the biomass of Earth life self-regulates the conditions on the planet to make its physical environment (in particular temperature and chemistry of the atmosphere) most hospitable to the species that constitutes its life

MEDEA HYPOTHESIS

The overall effect of life has been and will be to reduce the longevity of the Earth as a habitable planet. Life itself, because it's inherently Darwinian, is biocidal, suicidal, and creates a series of positive feedbacks to Earth systems (like temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide) that harm later generations. 

Under Gaian sense, these rather selfish biocidal and suicidal tendencies of populations somehow change at the scale of the biosphere. Individuals and populations are seen as bad, but together they all do "good". I would suggest that individuals are neutral, but life as an aggregate is negative to itself. 

For all its history, the Earth has been within the Habitable Zone (the "right" range of distance from the Sun where an Earth-like planet can have surface temperatures that allow oceans and animals to exist withoud freezing or frying). However, the Habitable Zone moves outward as the Sun becomes brighter, and in the future the zone will pass the Earth and leave it behind. The Earth will become like Venus!

The planetary thermostat is a system that has kept the global average temperature of the Earth between the boiling and freezing points, allowing for the most important requirement for life (liquid water) to continually exist on the surface of the planet for an immense amount of time. 

If the Gaia hypothesis is correct, the role of organisms in this cycle should keep temperatures stable and optimal for life. This has not been the case. Life has repeatedly interfered with the planetary thermostat in important and nearly disastrous ways. 

It's because of life that the amount of C02 in the Earth's atmosphere has been steadily dropping in the last 200 million years. It's life that makes most calcium carbonate deposits (like coral skeletons) that cause a drop in C02 since it takes C02 from the atmosphere to build this type of skeleton. Life will continue to do this until a lethal lower limit is attained. 



